Part I

CHAPTER

01

BRIEF INTRODUCTION

TO DISASTER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE IN INDIA AND IN NAGALAND

VISION 
To build a safe and disaster resilient India by developing a holistic, proactive, multi-disaster 

oriented and technology driven strategy through a culture of prevention, mitigation, 

preparedness and response. Disaster Management (DM).

A disaster refers to a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence from natural or 

man-made causes, which is beyond the coping capacity of the affected community. DM 

involves a continuous and integrated process of planning, organising, coordinating and 

implementing measures which are necessary or expedient for:

Prevention of danger or threat of any disaster. 

Mitigation or reduction of risk of any disaster or its severity or consequences. 

Capacity building including research and knowledge management. 

Preparedness to deal with any disaster

Prompt response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster. 

Assessing the severity or magnitude of effects of any disaster. 

Evacuation, rescue and relief. 

Rehabilitation and reconstruction. 

A typical DM continuum comprises six elements; the pre-disaster phase includes 

prevention, mitigation and preparedness, while the post-disaster phase includes 

response, rehabilitation, reconstruction and recovery. A legal and institutional framework 

binds all these elements together (Diagram I).

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 03

1.2 INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM TO RESPONSE TO DISASTER
1.2.1 Disaster Management Act, 2005

The Act lays down institutional, legal, financial and coordination mechanisms at the 

National, State, District and Local levels. These institutions are not parallel structures and 

will work in close harmony. The new institutional framework is expected to usher in a 

paradigm shift in DM from relief-centric approach to a proactive regime that lays greater 

emphasis on preparedness, prevention and mitigation. The Disaster Management 

Act 2005 lays down a three tier institutional structure for disaster management at the 

national, state and district levels in the form of NDMA, SDMA and DDMA. National Policy 

on Disaster Management (NPDM) has further specified the roles and responsibilities of 

various organizations for disaster response.

1.3 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK UNDER THE ACT: 
1.3.1 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)

The NDMA, as the apex body for disaster management, is headed by the Prime 

Minister and has the responsibility for laying down policies, plans and guidelines for 

DM and coordinating their enforcement and implementation for ensuring timely 

and effective response to disasters. The guidelines will assist the Central Ministries, 

Departments and States to formulate their respective DM plans. It will approve 

the National Disaster Management Plans and DM plans of the Central Ministries/

Departments. It will take such other measures, as it may consider necessary, for 

the prevention of disasters, or mitigation, or preparedness and capacity building, 

for dealing with a threatening disaster situation or disaster. Central Ministries/

Departments and State Governments will extend necessary cooperation and 

assistance to NDMA for carrying out its mandate. It will oversee the provision and 

application of funds for mitigation and preparedness measures.

04

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

NDMA has the power to authorise the Departments or authorities concerned, to 

make emergency procurement of provisions or materials for rescue and relief in a 

threatening disaster situation or disaster. The general superintendence, direction 

and control of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) is vested in and will 

be exercised by the NDMA. The National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) 

works within the framework of broad policies and guidelines laid down by the NDMA.

The NDMA is mandated to deal with all types of disasters; natural or man-made. 

Whereas, such other emergencies including those requiring close involvement of the 

security forces and/or intelligence agencies such as terrorism (counter-insurgency), 

law and order situations, serial bomb blasts, hijacking, air accidents, CBRN weapon 

systems, mine disasters, port and harbour emergencies, forest fires, oilfield fires 

and oil spills will continue to be handled by the extant mechanism i.e., National 

Crisis Management Committee (NCMC).

1.3.2 National Executive Committee (NEC)

The NEC comprises the Union Home Secretary as Chairperson, and the Secretaries 

to the GoI in the Ministries/Departments of Agriculture, Atomic Energy, Defence, 

Drinking Water Supply, Environment and Forests, Finance (Expenditure), Health, 

Power, Rural Development, Science & Technology, Space, Telecommunications, 

Urban Development, Water Resources and the Chief of the Integrated Defence 

Staff of the Chiefs of Staff Committee as members. Secretaries in the Ministry of 

External Affairs, Earth Sciences, Human Resource Development, Mines, Shipping, 

Road Transport & Highways, and the Secretary, NDMA will be special invitees to the 

meetings of the NEC.

The NEC is the executive committee of the NDMA, and is mandated to assist the 

NDMA in the discharge of its functions and also ensure compliance of the directions 

issued by the Central Government. The NEC is to coordinate the response in the 

event of any threatening disaster situation or disaster. The NEC will prepare the 

National Plan for Disaster Management based on the National Policy on Disaster 

Management. The NEC will monitor the implementation of guidelines issued by 

NDMA. It will also perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central 

Government in consultation with the NDMA.

1.4 STATE LEVEL

At the State level, the SDMA, headed by the Chief Minister, will lay down policies and 

plans for DM in the State. It will, inter alia approve the State Plan in accordance with 

the guidelines laid down by the NDMA, coordinate the implementation of the State 

Plan, recommend provision of funds for mitigation and preparedness measures and 

review the developmental plans of the different Departments of the State to ensure 

the integration of prevention, preparedness and mitigation measures.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 05

1.5 STATE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (SDMA)

1. 

 Meeting of the SDMA shall be convened on the direction of Chief Minister

2. SDMA will take stock of the situation.

3. SDMA shall give necessary directions to SEC, Deptt. Of Disaster Management 

and other Departments/agencies of the State Government and concerned 

DDMAs.

4. SDMA shall decide on Inter-State assistance and cooperation.

The State Government shall constitute a State Executive Committee (SEC) to assist the 

SDMA in the performance of its functions. The SEC will be headed by the Chief Secretary 

to the State Government and coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National 

Policy, the National Plan and the State Plan. The SEC will also provide information to the 

NDMA relating to different aspects of DM.

1.6 STATE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (SEC)

1. Home Commissioner/Secretary (NSDMA) shall convene the meeting of SEC

2. SEC shall assess the situation and give directions to the concerned Departments/

agencies of the State Govt. and DDMAs concerned regarding measures to be 

taken by them in response to any specific threatening disaster situation or 

disaster.

3. SEC shall coordinate response of various agencies

4. SEC shall requisition NDRF or Armed Forces if the situation so demands.

5. SEC may depute a team of Officials to visit the affected Districts for on the spot 

assessment of the situation and supervise the response & relief measures.

6. SEC shall mobilize resources and dispatch them to concerned Districts.

7. SEC shall monitor and review the situation on a regular basis

8. SEC shall keep the NEC and NDMA informed of the situation.

9. SEC shall constantly evaluate their own capabilities to handle that situation and 

project the anticipated requirements for the central resources well in time.

10. SEC shall deploy State level Incident Command Team on the request of the 

DDMA as and when required.

11. In the event of calamity of severe nature, the SEC will consider appointment 

of Senior Officers, delegate powers and assign specific areas for timely and 

effective, efficient management of disasters.

12. SEC will also take necessary steps to pool the resources for better management 

of crisis situation. This includes the pooling of food grains funds and other 

resources available in the districts under various Government schemes. 

However, these resources will be reimbursed to the respective schemes/

Departments once the situation becomes normal.

06

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

1.7 DISTRICT DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (DDMA)
The DDMA will be headed by the District Collector, Deputy Commissioner or District 

Magistrate as the case may be, with the elected representative of the local authority as 

the Co-Chairperson. The DDMA will act as the planning, coordinating and implementing 

body for DM at the District level and take all necessary measures for the purposes of 

DM in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the NDMA and SDMA. It will, inter 

alia prepare the District DM plan for the District and monitor the implementation of the 

National Policy, the State Policy, the National Plan, the State Plan and the District Plan. 

The DDMA will also ensure that the guidelines for prevention, mitigation, preparedness 

and response measures lay down by the NDMA and the SDMA are followed by all the 

Departments of the State Government at the District level and the local authorities in the 

District.

1.7.1 District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA)

1. DDMA shall assess the situation and give directions to the concerned Line 

Departments/Agencies at the District level regarding measures to be taken by 

them in response to any specific threatening disaster situation or disaster.

2. DDMA shall take such other action as may be necessary for coordinated response 

to natural disasters. These may include the following:

a. Assessing situations based on reports received from various sources 

and giving directions to different agencies for immediate response, 

relief and restoration of critical infrastructure

b. Reviewing the resources and capacities of different agencies to deal with 

the situations and giving directions for pooling available manpower, 

equipments and resources available with different agencies for speedy 

and effective response

c. Requisitioning assistance from SDRF/NDRF/ Armed Forces/ other 

specialized agencies, if necessary

d. Coordinating with civil society and Non-Governmental Organizations 

for supplementing the efforts of government agencies

e. Monitoring and reviewing the situations on a regular basis.

Home Department, Nagaland State Disaster Management Authority (DM) and Relief and 

Rehabilitation (RR) shall be the nodal department for disaster management and Home 

Commissioner shall implement the decisions of the SEC pertaining to State level Response 

to natural disasters.

Disaster response being a multi-agency function, other Departments of the State 

Governments will provide emergency support in their relevant domains at the State/

District levels.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 07

1.8 FOLLOWING SHALL BE THE SEQUENCE OF ACTION AT THE STATE 
LEVEL: SEOC SHALL DISCHARGE THE FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS:

1. On receipt of information either from NEOC/DEOC or from Early Warning 

Agencies or any other reliable sources, State Emergency Operation Centre, shall 

be activated fully as per laid down protocol.

2. SEOC shall issue alerts/warning to all designated authorities at the State level 

and Districts including for Public Information to AIR/Doordarshan/Press.

3. SEOC shall send First Information Report to NEOC, MHA and thereafter Daily 

Situation Report till situation normalizes.

4. SEOC shall collect all relevant information and appraise the status to the 

designated decision making authorities.

It shall arrange Meetings of SEC

It shall activate ESFs of State if the situation so warrants

5. 

6. 

1.9 ROLE OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS/AGENCIES

1. On activation of State ESF Plan, the concerned Department/Agency shall depute 

the designated officials to SEOC for coordination of response measures.

2. Departments/Agencies shall coordinate with their National counterparts and 

mobilize central assistances, such as specialized manpower, equipments, 

materials etc. to meet immediate needs in their respective sectors.

3. Departments/Agencies shall provide resources both in terms of men and 

material for assistance to the DDMAs.

1.10. VILLAGE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY AND VILLAGE 

DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Core Committee:

The Village Disaster Management Authority (VDMA) is consisting of the Village 

Council headed by the Chairman along with its members and the Secretary of 

Village Development Board (VDB) shall constitute the Village Disaster Management 

Authority (VDMA). 

There shall be a Village Disaster Management Core Committee (VDMCC) to assist 

and coordinate with Intra-Village/Sub-Divisional Authority/District Authority and 

State Authority with regard to Disaster Management and Response at the Village 

Level. The following are the Terms of Reference (ToR) for the members of Village 

Disaster Management Core Committee (VDMCC);

1. The Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall function under the 

Village Council. 

2. The Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall consist of minimum 

5 members and not exceeding 10 members.

3. No two members of the Village Disaster Management Core Committee 

should be from the same household.

08

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

4. The member of Village Disaster Management Core Committee should be a 

regular resident of the village.

5. The eligible age limit for the member of the Village Disaster Management 

Core Committee shall be between 30-50 years. The membership of the 

Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall co-terminate with the 

eligible age criteria. 

6. The Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall comprise of at least 

one woman member or more depending on the Village Council membership 

composition.

7. The Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall consist of key line 

committee existing in the Village Level such as Health, Power, Water & 

Sanitation, and Education etc. 

8. The Village Disaster Management Core Committee shall coordinate with 

Intra-Village/Sub-Division Authority and District Authority and State Authority 

before/during and after Disaster.

The Powers of Chairperson of Village Disaster Management Authority and Powers 

and Functions of Village Disaster Management Authority shall remain the same as 

per Section 32 and 34 of Nagaland State Disaster Management Rules 2008. 

1.11 FIRST RESPONSE

In disasters where there are no early warning signals available, the community 

members will be the first responder. However, immediate support and assistance 

shall be available from other important first responders like the police, State 

Disaster Response Force (SDRFs), Fire and Medical Services. Other important 

responders will be the Civil Defence, Home Guards and youth organizations such 

as NCC, NSS and NYKS drawn from local units.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 09

CHAPTER

02

IRS

 INCIDENT RESPONSE SYSTEM

What is IRS

• 

• 

• 

• 

IRS is a mechanism which reduces adhocism in response through a well 

conceived team.

It incorporates all the task that may need to be performed during the response.

It identifies and pre-designates officers to perform various duties and get them 

trained in their roles.

It is flexible system and only those Sections/Branches may be activated in the 

team which is required to meet the disaster situation.

10

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

2.1 FUNCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES

Responsible Officer 

Primary Responsible for effective Response

Command 

Overall incharge of the incident Response Team and its Effective 

Operations 

Planning 

Functioning

Direct and Supervise all Tactical Actions

Collect/ Analyze Data, Workout need of Required Resources and 

Prepare Action Plan

Logistics & Finance 

Provide Logistics Support, Procurement and Cost Accounting

2.2. FEATURES OF IRS

1. Management by Objectives & Incident Action Plan
2. Flexibility 
3. Span of Control 
4. Multi Tasking 
5. Accountability 
6. Resource Management 
7. Common Terminology 
8. Unity Of Command and Chain of Command
9. Transfer of Command 
10. Unified Command 
11. Medical Plan
12. Communication Plan
13. Demobilization Plan

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 11

MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES & INCIDENT ACTION PLAN

12

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Incident Commander

Information & Media Officer

OPERATION SECTION

Staging Area

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 13

2.3 UNIFIED COMMAND

A team effort which allows all agencies with responsibility for the incident, to jointly 

provide management direction to an incident through a common set of incident 

objectives and strategies established at the command level.

2.4. CIRCUMSTANCES FOR IMPLEMENTING UNIFIED COMMAND 

When incident become larger or when complexity of the incident require involvement 

of multiple agencies

2.5 AREA COMMAND 

Area command is an expansion of the incident response function, primarily designed 

to manage a very large number of incidents that has multiple IRTS assigned or area 

being isolated because of geographical reasons. 

It is established for overseeing response and to ensure that conflicts, jurisdictional or 

otherwise, do not arise amongst deployed responding teams.

2.6 TRANSFER OF COMMAND 

The transfer of command in any incident may take place for the following reasons:

When an incident becomes overwhelming for the IC and IRT;

More qualified and experienced senior officers arrive at the scene;

The incident situation changes over time, where a jurisdictional or agency change in 

command is operationally required; and Normal turnover of personnel in the case of 

long or extended incidents.

14

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

2. 7. COMMON TERMINOLOGY

2.8 EMERGENCY OPERATION CENTER

One Sr. Administrative officer as eoc in-charge having experience in dm with required 

assistants; representation of all concerned line departments with authority to quickly 

mobilize their resources; Adequate space with proper infrastructure to accommodate 

the participating agencies and departments; communication facilities with last mile 

connectivity; A vehicle mounted with hf, vhf and satellite telephone for deployment 

in the affected site to provide immediate connectivity with the headquarters and 

icp; A representative of central teams (NDRF, armed forces) whenever they are 

deployed to integrate their resources, expertise and to resolve conflicts that may 

arise during the response effort; provision and plan for dovetailing the NDRF, armed 

forces communication capabilities with the local communication set up. There will 

be proper plan so that all are able to connect with each other in case of large scale 

disasters or failure of the local communication systems; 

Map depicting affected site, resources deployed, facilities established like incident 

command post, staging area, incident base, camp, relief camp, helibase, helipad, etc. 

DM PLANS OF ALL LINE DEPARTMENTS;
DM PLANS OF THE STATE AND THE DISTRICT:
• Directories with contact details of all emergency services and nodal officers;

• Connectivity with all district headquarters and police stations;

• Database of NGOs working in different geographical areas;

• Demographic details of the state and districts;

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 15

ONLINE / WEB BASED DSS WITH THE AVAILABILITY OF AT LEAST THE 
FOLLOWING COMPONENTS:
• 

Standardisation of command structure with the details of the earmarked and trained 

personnel in IRS;

• Proactive planning facilities;

• Comprehensive resource management system;

• Geographic information system (GIS) for decision support; and

• Modeling capability for predicting casualties and resources for large scale incidents 

including cbrn emergencies.

• 

Socio-economic, demographic and land use planning;

• Resource inventories of all line departments and connectivity with database of india 

• Disaster resource network (IDRN) india disaster knowledge network (IDKN) and

• Corporate disaster resource network (CDRN);

2.9 INCIDENT COMMAND POST

The ICP is the location at which the primary command functions and coordination 

are performed.

The ic will be located at the ICP. 

There will only be one ICP. 

This also applies to situations with multi-agencies or multi jurisdictional incidents 

operating under a single or unified command.

Normally ICP is not relocated

STAGING AREA
The staging area is an area where resources are collected and kept ready for deployment 

for field operations. These may include things like food, vehicles and other materials and 

equipment.

The SA will be established at a suitable area near the affected site for immediate, effective 

and quick deployment of resources. 

More than one sa may be established if required. 

If resources are mobilised at other locations to be ultimately despatched to the affected 

areas, these locations are also known as SAs. 

BASE 
Normally base is the location where all uncommitted / out-of-service equipment and 

personnel to support operations are located.

It will be designated by incident name. 

The management of the incident base comes under the facility unit of ls.

CAMPS 
• 

Temporary locations to provide services to incident personnel.

• May be moved – from one place to another.

• All base activities may be performed at camps.

• Designated by geographic name or number.

16

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

HELIBASE 
Location where helicopters may be parked, maintained, fueled, and loaded.

Helibase can be located at airport or other off-incident location.

Helibase will be managed by helibase manager.

HELIPAD 
Temporary locations where helicopters can safely land and take off.

Can be used to load or off-load personnel, equipment, and supplies.

Helipad managers will be on the ground.

Helipad manager reports to helibase manager.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 17

18

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHAPTER

03

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER TEAM

ROLE OF COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER AND CHARACTERISTIC OF COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

3. 1 TEAM COMPOSITION

Physically and Psychologically sound volunteers male and female, having 

demonstrated ability, capacity and willingness to work in an emergency, could 

constitute a rescue team. Volunteers, of both the sex, above 18 years of age, with a 

minimum education level to read and write in local language.

Preference would be given to ex-military or army personnel and artisans from the 

village or from the locality. It is essential that each safe shelter form a rescue group, 

comprising of 8 members, out of which a minimum of 2 members should be skilled 

persons. The members should be from the safe shelter, community and from the 

periphery villages.

1. Team leader or Incident Commander: 1

2. Liasoning person: 1

3. Rescuers: 4 members

4. First Aid: 4 members

The members should have interest to participate in the training courses on search 

and rescue organised by the Nagaland State Disaster Management Authority, Home 

Department, Govt. of Nagaland, Civil Society Organisation or any other NGOs.

3.2 Duties of the Rescuer

3.2.1 Assessment:

Proper assessment saves time and improves better performance. Collect information 

on the extent of; the damage, approach to the damaged area, particulars of the 

damage, and if any further damage is likely to occur. The assessment can be done 

in two methods.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 19

3.2.2 Information:

Information provided by the local leaders or the group leader or from the Disaster 

Preparedness Committee is important.

3.2.3 Observation:

Follow the 3 key principles during the survey or assessment

I. LOOK: See physically the incidents and make a thorough visual inspection.

II. LISTEN: Listen to all sources of information from the community, from the 

people, Government records etc. Assess the community data regarding people 

in danger.

III. FEEL: Feel convinced regarding the facts, the gravity of the dangers and your own 

capacity to respond.

3.2.4. Plan

Rescue is a team effort that needs coordination and planning amongst the members 

for an optimum response operation. After the assessment, the Rescue team would 

be in a position to adequately plan the Rescue Operation based on the following 

details and specifications;

1. Manpower

2. Equipments

3. Methods

3.3 Job of Community First Responder

The First Responder may function in the context of a broader role. With a limited 

amount of equipment, the Community First Responder provides immediate support 

to the community in times of any disaster. The Community First Responder:

1. Functions in uncommon situations.

2. Has a basic understanding of stress response and methods to ensure personal 

well-being.

3. Has an understanding of body substance isolation.

4. Understands basic medical-legal principles and first aid.

5. Functions within the scope of care as defined by state, regional, and local regulatory

6. Agencies and Nagaland State Disaster Management Authority, Home Department.

7. Complies with regulations on the handling of the deceased, protection of property, 

and evidence at the scene while awaiting additional resources for response 

operation. 

20

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

8. Before initiating patient care, the Community First Responder will size up the scene 

to determine that the scene is safe; identify the mechanism of injury or nature of 

illness and the total number of patients, and request additional help if necessary. 

In the absence of law enforcement, the Community First Responder creates a safe 

traffic environment. 

9. Using a limited amount of equipment, the Community First Responder renders 

emergency medical care to adults, children, and infants on the basis of assessment 

findings.

The role of the CFR is highly varied and encompasses many elements, the main ones 

being:

• To provide community level preparedness before the incident of Disaster (pre), to 

attend to provide support during Disaster and to provide support for demobilization 

after Disaster. 

• To attend appropriate emergency as the first call for search & rescue before any 

outside help reaches.

• To provide an appropriate and necessary treatment to a patient before any outside 

resource arrives.

• To accurately document, record and inform the attending SDRF/NDRF to come 

with appropriate equipments and personnel to respond to the incident of Disaster.

• To remain at the scene of an incident until de-briefing is done by the SDRF/NDRF.

3.4 Characteristic of Community First Responder

a. Community First Responder Characteristics:

The Community First Responder must be a person who can remain calm while working 

in difficult and stressful circumstances.

The Community First Responder is expected to be a team player. Personal qualities 

such as the ability to take charge and control the situation are essential, as are 

maintaining a caring and professional attitude, controlling his/her own fears, presenting 

a professional appearance, staying physically fit, and keeping his/her skills and abilities 

up to date. Self-confidence, a desire to work with people, emotional stability, and 

tolerance for high stress, honesty, a pleasant demeanour, and the ability to meet the 

physical and intellectual requirements demanded by this position are characteristics 

of the competent Community First Responder. The Community First Responder also 

must be able to deal with adverse social situations. The Community First Responder 

ideally possesses an interest in working for the good of society and has a commitment 

to doing so.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 21

b. Physical Demands:

Aptitudes required for work of this nature are good physical stamina, endurance, and 

body condition that would not be adversely affected by having to walk, stand, lift, carry, 

and balance, at times. Motor coordination is necessary because the patient’s and the 

Community First Responder’s well-being, as well as that of other workers, must not be 

jeopardized while on uneven terrain.

c. Additional Skills:

1. Use of the telephone or radio dispatch for coordination of prompt emergency 

services is essential.

2. Accurately discerning street names through map reading and correctly distinguishing 

house numbers or business addresses are essential to task completion in the most 

expedient manner.

3. Concisely and accurately describing orally to dispatcher and other concerned staff 

one’s impression of patient’s condition is critical as the Community First Responder 

works in emergency conditions where there may not be time for deliberation.

4. The Community First Responder must also be able to accurately report all relevant 

patient data, which is generally, but not always, outlined on a prescribed form.

5. Verbal and reasoning skills are used extensively.

22

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHAPTER

PERSONAL AND SCENE SAFETY OF

04
CFR

Whilst problems are relatively rare, entering strange places and situations can present 

real dangers to both responders and emergency crews due to a combination of factors 

including unfamiliar surroundings, persons present, general environment etc. Therefore, 

the number one priority before attending any incident is your own personal safety and 

security and this should remain so regardless of the circumstances.

Danger can present itself in many forms including bystanders, relatives, the patient, 

traffic, environment, animals, chemicals to name but a few. So you must ensure that you 

continually make both audible and visual observations as you approach the incident and 

throughout.

• 

If you feel that it is not safe to attend the incident (i.e. a crowd outside the house 

etc) then simply drive past, park up at a safe distance, out of sight from the scene 

and inform the SEOC of the situation immediately.

• The SEOC will notify the situation to the higher authority and SDRF for resource and 

the Police if necessary.

• Await further instruction from the SEOC and never be tempted to return back to 

scene without prior clearance from the Police, the SEOC or the SDRF.

Remember to:

• Look – Can you see any potential hazards?

• Listen – Can you hear anything of concern?

• Think – Is it truly safe to approach?

• Act – Only approach when you are certain that it is safe.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 23

When assessing a scene consider:

• Yourself – will approaching the scene place you in danger?

• The Scene – Is the scene safe?

• The Patient – Can you safely assess and treat the patient?

4.1 Entering premises or in any emergency situation:

• After you have been greeted at the door introduce yourself by saying ‘Community 

First Responder, how may I help?’

• 

Invite the person who greeted you to ‘Lead the way’ try not to let them get behind 

you as this may place you in danger if the person has an ulterior motive.

• 

If possible, keep an escape route open and say ‘may we leave the door open as 

the SDRF will be here soon’ if necessary state that you will close the door, however 

simply leave it on the latch so that it can be opened quickly and easily from both the 

outside and inside.

• Try to make a mental note of doors that you have come through to aid a rapid 

escape if needed. Many houses are large and/or with a complex layout compounded 

by the fact that all of the doors may be the same style and colour which may cause 

confusion in the event of a rapid escape being required.

As mentioned previously, problems at scene are relatively rare, however your personal 

safety should be your number one priority at all times, so if at any time you become 

uncomfortable with the situation politely but firmly say ‘I am just going back to the car to 

get some extra equipment’ this can then provide you with an opportunity to get out of the 

house, back to the car, and drive off.

Once at a safe distance (out of direct vision of the incident), immediately inform the SEOC 

of what took place so that they can make the ambulance crew aware of the problem and 

call for police assistance if necessary. In true emergency situations, it may be necessary 

for you to use the 999 system and inform the ambulance call taker who you are.

Remember that situations constantly change. Dangers may present at any time, so 

be prepared to withdraw if necessary

24

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHAPTER

05
Art of Communication

5.1 THE ART OF COMMUNICATION
Effective patient communication is arguably one of the most important yet complex skills 

that anybody can have within pre-hospital care. Whilst certain elements can be taught, 

the majority rely upon natural abilities and experience gained throughout our everyday 

lives.

Therefore, here are some simple guidelines regarding communicating with patients:

1. Always use a calm approach (voice and body language): people under stress will 

often have a heightened state of anxiety with a raised voice and erratic, rushed 

movements. Talking to them in a calm and controlled manner will help alleviate 

any stress and allow you to gain control of the situation

2. Respect personal space: everybody’s personal space boundaries are different and 

there is no ideal distance. So be mindful not to initially ‘crowd’ a patient and if 

possible, kneel down so that you are speaking at eye level as this is deemed less 

threatening.

3. Use non-verbal techniques: such as smiling, open body language and appropriate 

gestures

4. Always apply due respect to the cultures, values and beliefs of the patient.

5. 

Try to pronounce names correctly: if unsure, ask the patient or relative. If the name 

6. 

7. 

8. 

is unknown then use sir or madam as appropriate.

Try to avoid over familiarity with the patient and relatives.

Introductions: introduce yourself, your role and explain your action.

Try to use open questions: such as ‘How can I help?’ ‘Where does it hurt?’ ‘Can you 

describe the pain for me?’ Most successful questioning techniques rely upon a 

mixture of both open and closed (yes/no) questioning and will vary considerably 

between patients.

9. Give patients time to answer: do not be tempted to finish sentences off for them.

10. 

If a medical or other condition has an adverse effect upon the patient’s speech 

capabilities, then you can ask a relative or bystander but be mindful to always 

include the patient in your conversation and never talk over or ignore them.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 25

11. Remember that initially patients may be anxious, frightened, confused or even 

aggressive, however good communication techniques can very often overcome 

these hurdles and afford you the trust to effectively assess and treat the patient.

12. Never assume who people are in relation to a patient, always ask!

13. Language or cultural barriers may hinder communication, so if possible use reliable 

relatives or bystanders to translate.

14. Be aware that it may take longer for some patients to fully understand things; this 

is particularly applicable to those with learning difficulties, the elderly, the young 

or patients who have suffered a stroke etc.

Sometimes patients appear to make decisions concerning their health, safety and welfare 

that may seem at direct odds with what others may consider as ‘sensible’, including 

relatives, bystanders and professionals helping them. However it must be borne in mind 

that in the majority of circumstances every person has a right to refuse treatment or 

reject offers of help and any unlawful enforcement against the patient’s wishes may be in 

direct contravention of the law.

Some points to remember:

1. A patient may refuse treatment at any time, even if you have previously commenced 

treatment/provided help.

2. All treatment/assessment procedures should be explained clearly so that the 

patient can make an informed choice.

3. Relatives may express a view but cannot directly give legal consent in most 

instances. If there are any issues surrounding this, then you must contact the EOC 

immediately. 

4. 

It is permissible to act without consent for unconscious patients or those in cardiac 

arrest. However, again be mindful of the concerns/thoughts of relatives/bystanders 

and any increased risk providing treatment may cause if they deem it unnecessary 

or against their wishes.

5. Whilst relatives generally cannot legally refuse a responder delivering care, they 

may become aggressive if you do not stop when asked. In these circumstances, if 

you feel at risk, withdraw and inform the EOC

6. Attempts to treat a conscious patient when consent is not given may lead to conflict 

and may even instigate a charge of physical assault.

26

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHAPTER

06

CONSENT AND 
CONFIDENTIALITY

The assessment and treatment of children is an incredibly complex area and often highly 

emotive. It should be remembered that at all times you should keep the interests and 

welfare of the child in mind, yet also respect the wishes of parents. Once children reach 

the age of 16, they are presumed in law to be competent (as long as they fulfill the criteria 

below). In many respects they should be treated as adults and can give consent for their 

own medical treatment.

Children under 16 years of age are not deemed to be automatically legally competent to 

give consent unless they are able to fulfill the following criteria.

A person (adult or child) is deemed as competent when:

1. 

They are able to understand and retain the information relating to the decision 

about their care, i.e. the type, reason and possible consequences of the proposed 

treatment, as well as the consequences of not having treatment.

2. 

They are able to use this information to consider whether or not they should 

consent to the treatment offered.

3. 

They are able to communicate their wishes.

If the child is deemed competent and wishes to receive treatment, then those with 

parental responsibility cannot over-ride them. If a competent child is refusing treatment, 

those with parental responsibility can consent if the treatment is deemed to be in the 

child’s interests.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 27

6.1 PATIENT CONFIDENTIALITY
Patient confidentiality is treated very seriously within any field of healthcare and 

everybody involved in patient care has a duty under law to observe and respect that.

To remain both compliant and within the law, follow these simple rules:

1. Any information provided to you as a responder is confidential and must be treated 

as such at all times

2. 

You must never disclose confidential information to others (i.e. relatives, 

neighbours, bystanders, the press etc). Whilst this may potentially raise some 

issues with concerned relatives/friends, the patient’s confidentiality must be 

respected and you may have to highlight this to the relative/friend.

3. 

You may only hand over confidential information to the next person who will be 

directly responsible for the patient’s care (e.g. ambulance crew). Remain mindful 

of the presence of others when undertaking any handover.

4. Any information documented on a report form should also be handed over as 

above.

5. 

Schemes are not permitted to keep or share any confidential details, regardless of 

the circumstances, nor are you permitted to disclose confidential information to 

your own relatives, friends etc.

CONFIDENTIALITY
is a legal right and we all have a duty to respect that how 
would you feel if your GP discussed your medical file with 
your neighbours.

28

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHAPTER

07

INFECTION CONTROL & USE OF GLOVES

Effective infection control procedures are vital in the provision of the safe and effective 

treatment and management of any patient to provide protection to both patient and 

carer. Just take a moment to consider if you would be happy to be treated by someone 

who has just been to the toilet yet failed to wash their hands after? The germs have to go 

somewhere!

Therefore a few simple rules should be followed:

1. Keep cuts and grazes covered at all times.

2. Maintain good personal hygiene at all times.

3. Keep nails short and clean.

4. 

Ensure that your hands are washed thoroughly after patient contact or if this is not 

possible, the use of an antibacterial hand rubs.

5. All clinical waste should be disposed of in a yellow clinical waste bag and passed to 

crew for disposal. It must never be placed in domestic rubbish!

6. Consumables are for single patient use only and should not be re-used (these will 

be highlighted throughout your course)

7.1 USING GLOVES

Latex free disposable gloves are one of the main infection control measures used 

when directly treating a patient, but should always be complimented by good hand 

cleansing techniques such as washing and anti-bacterial rubs.

7.2 WHEN TO WEAR GLOVES

1. Most gloves used within emergency care simply act as a protective barrier and are 

not sterile; therefore all attempts must be made to keep them as clean as possible 

before patient contact.

2. Never wear gloves to or from an emergency, particularly where you have to touch 

other objects including steering wheels, door handles/latches etc.

3. Only put gloves on once you are at the patient’s side.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 29

4. 

If potential contact with blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, the exception 

being perspiration.

5. When in contact with patients under isolation precautions.

6. 

7. 

If you are in contact with patients with obvious skin abrasions.

If the patient is not socially clean.

7.3 THE USE OF GLOVES

1. Wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand hygiene

2. Gloves should only be worn as single use items

3. Gloves should be put on beside the patient

4. Apply alcohol hand rub before putting on gloves (if possible)

5. Change gloves between patients and between dirty and clean procedures on the 

same patient

6. Hands must always be decontaminated after removal of gloves

7. Gloves must be disposed of as clinical waste (yellow bag)

8. Do not wash or use alcohol hand rub on gloves

9. Gloves are not necessary for most clinical procedures

10. Wear gloves for the minimum period possible, ideally for periods no greater than 

20 minutes at a time

11. Frequent use increases risk of sensitisation so appropriate use of gloves is 

recommended.

7.4 EFFECTIVE HAND WASHING

Technique is more important than the solution used. An effective hand washing 

technique involves 3 stages: Preparation, Washing & Rinsing and Drying. When hands 

are washed in a hasty manner certain areas tend to be missed. The diagram below 

highlights the areas of skin that are commonly missed during poor hand washing.

30

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Remove jewellery (wedding rings may be kept on if necessary).

1. Preparation requires wetting your hands with water and then applying a liquid soap/solution.

2. This should be followed by vigorous rubbing of hands for 10-15 seconds paying particular 

attention to tips of fingers, thumbs and between the fingers.

3. Hands should be thoroughly rinsed and properly dried using paper towels.

4. The wearing of gloves is never an alternative to good hand hygiene.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 31

CHAPTER

08

Part II

SEARCH DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS

8.1 DEFINITIONS

The following definitions of search have become accepted standards for conducting 

disaster search operations. It is possible that the local Incident Commander may use 

different terms to define search strategies and tactics. For consistency and common 

operating language the following definitions are generally accepted: 

Unit Objectives

Successful participants will understand and be capable of utilizing the follow 

standardized disaster marking systems:

• Grid and Block Marking System 

• Structure Hazard Evaluation Marking System

• Structure/Hazard Marking System

• Survivor and Human Remains Marking Systems

Grid and Block Marking Systems

The U.S. National Grid (USNG) has become the standard for establishing a reference 

point. When trying to identify a location on a map or document an important “find”, the 

USNG serves well as the required standard. At incidents involving several structures 

or large areas of damage, the identity and location of individual structures are crucial. 

The use of existing street names and addresses should always be considered first. 

Consistent with the standard grid and block marking system there is a standard 

reference system for the various sides and floor levels of the buildings themselves. 

As one stands on the street facing the structure that side of the building would be 

referred to as Side A. To the left of Side A is Side B and the rear of the building is called 

Side C (see figure below). Regardless of where the front door or the back door is, the 

street side of the building is referred to as Side A.

32

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Side C

Side B

Side B

Side A

700 Block Alpha Street

For a point of reference in multi-story structures most first responders refer to the 

ground level floor as Floor 1. The second story is referred to as Floor 2 and so on up 

the building. Basements and floors below the ground level floor are referred to as B-1 

for the first floor below ground level and B-2 for the second floor below.

8.2 STRUCTURAL HAZARD MARKING SYSTEMS

Structure hazards identified during initial size-up activities and throughout the 

incident should be noted. This Structure/Hazards Mark should be made on the 

outside of all normal entry points. Orange spray paint seems to be the most easily 

seen color on most backgrounds and line marking or downward spray cans apply the 

best paint marks. Lumber chalk or lumber crayons should be used to mark additional 

information inside the search mark itself because they are easier to write with than 

spray paint.

A large square box (approximately 2 ft x 2 ft) is outlined at any entrance accessible for 

entry into a compromised structure. Specific markings will be clearly made adjacent 

to the box to indicate the condition of the structure and any hazards found at the time 

of this assessment. Normally the square box marking would be made immediately 

adjacent to the entry point identified as safe. An arrow will be placed next to the box 

indicating the direction of the safe entrance if the Structure/Hazards marking must 

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 33

be made somewhat remote from the safe entrance.

• The structure is relatively safe for S&R OPS and 

there is little chance of further collapse.

• Survivors could be trapped by contents.

• Survivors could be unconscious. 

• The structure is significantly damaged and some 

areas may be relatively safe, but others may need 

shoring, bracing, removal, and/or monitoring of 

hazards.

• Building could be completely pancaked.

The structure is NOT SAFE for search and rescue 

operations and may be subject to sudden collapse.

• Remote Search operations may proceed at 

significant risk.

• 

If search and rescue operations are undertaken, 

safe haven areas and rapid evacuation routes (with 

structure monitoring) should be created.

• An arrow next to the marking box indicates the 

direction of safest entry to the structure.

HM

adjacent to the structure.

• HM indicates a hazardous material condition in or 

• Search and rescue operations normally will not 

be allowed until the condition is better defined or 

8.3 SEARCH MARKING SYSTEMS

eliminated.

Search markings must be easy to make, easy to read, and easy to understand. To 

be easily seen, the search mark must be large and of a contrasting color to the 

background surface. Orange spray paint seems to be the most easily seen color on 

most backgrounds, and line marking or downward spray cans apply the best pain 

marks. A lumber marking device may be used to write additional information inside 

the search mark itself when it would be difficult to write the additional information 

with spray paint.

A large distinct marking will be made outside the main entrance of each building or 

structure searched. This “Main Entrance” search marking will be completed in two steps.

• 

• 

First, a large (approximately 2 ft) single slash shall be made near the main 

entrance at the start of the search.

After the search of the entire structure has been completed, a second large slash 

34

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

shall be made in the opposite direction forming an “X”.

Additional information will be placed in the remaining three quadrants of the 

Main Entrance “X” summarizing the entire search of the structure.

Left Quadrant – will already contain the search team identifier, date, and time 

when the team first entered the structure.

Top Quadrant – date and time the search team left the structure.

Right Quadrant – any significant hazards located inside the structure.

Bottom Quadrant – number of survivors or human remains still inside the 

structure. (“L” or “D” = LIVE or DEAD; small “x” = no survivors or human remains.)

• 

• 

• 

• 

During the search function while inside the structure, a large single slash shall be 

made upon entry of each room or area. After the search of the room or area has been 

completed, a second large slash shall be drawn in the opposite direction forming an “X”.

The only additional information placed in any of the “X” quadrants while inside the 

structure shall be that pertaining to any significant hazards or the number of “LIVE” or 

“DEAD”.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 35

 
8.4 SURVIVOR MARKING SYSTEMS

Make a large (2’ x 2’) “V” with orange spray paint near the location of a potential 

survivor and/or human remains.

Mark the name of the Search Team or Crew identifier in the top part of the “V” with 

paint or a lumber marker type device. An arrow may need to be painted next to the 

“V” pointing towards the survivor and/or human remains when the location is not 

immediately near where the “V” is painted.

36

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Paint a circle around the “V” when a potential survivor is confirmed to be alive either 

visually, vocally, or hearing specific sounds that would indicate a high probability of 

a survivor. If more than one confirmed survivor, mark the total number of survivors 

under the “V”.

Paint a horizontal line through the middle of the “V” when a confirmed human 

remains is determined. If more than one confirmed human remains is found, mark 

the total number of human remains under the “V”. Use both the live and human 

remains-marking symbols when combinations of survivors and human remains are 

determined to be in the same location.

Paint an “X” through the confirmed human remains symbol after all survivors and/ 

or human remains(s) have been removed from the specific location identified by the 

marking. 

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 37

CHAPTER

09

VARIOUS METHODS FOR RESCUE OF VICTIMS

SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search and rescue are almost always performed in tandem, yet they are separate 

operations. The purpose of search operations is to locate living victims. The purpose 

of rescue operations is to physically remove an occupant or victim from a dangerous 

environment. Search and rescue is a technical activity rendered by a group of specially 

trained personnel, who rescue and attend to the casualties under adverse conditions, 

where life is at threat. Search and rescue is organized in close cooperation with the 

community and in a team approach. The search and rescue activities are undertaken in 

two ways;

Community Local Rescuers: With adequate safety measures, rescue immediately after 

any natural calamities such as cyclone, flood, earthquake and fire in a community.

Outside Community Resources: Circumstances where the situation is grave and the 

local rescuers do not have required efficiency and equipments, and then specialist 

assistance from outside the community is required. Rescuers to immediately take up; 

the rescue activities after a cyclone, flood, earthquake and fire where people might be 

trapped by fallen debris and in need to be rescued without delay. 

The community rescuers shall have to be in readiness to respond quickly, when a cyclone 

is likely to strike .The rescuers efficiency level to be maintained thorough practice and 

demonstrations / mock-drills during the no disaster period. The rescue team should 

undergo standard training from time to time.

Objectives;

1. To rescue the survivors trapped under the debris, from the damaged buildings or 

from a cyclonic storm surge, flood, earthquake and fire.

2. To provide First Aid services to the trapped survivors and to dispatch them for 

medical care.

3. To take immediate necessary actions, as necessary, for temporary support and 

protection to endangered collapsed buildings to structures.

4. To hand-over, recover and dispose-off the bodies of the deceased.

5. To train, demonstrate and raise awareness on how to use the local materials for 

self-rescue amongst the community people.

38

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

RESCUE STAGES
STAGE-1

Surface Causality (Emergency Rescue)
To locate the surface casualty the rescue is conducted from the outer-edges of the 

damaged area and rescued shall be provided First Aid services. In case the rescued is 

more severely injured, after providing the First Aid services, dispatch as quickly as possible 

to the nearest hospital for medical care.

STAGE-II

Search in Slightly Damaged Buildings (Immediate Rescue)
The rescue team should move towards the slightly damaged buildings after responding 

to the surface casualty. It might happen that some persons trapped can be contacted 

but cannot be reached easily. In such events, before entering to the damaged building 

or house, a careful analysis of the methods best suited to safely rescue the trapped is to 

be made. The team leader has to take proper decisions without risking the lives of the 

rescuers or the injured. Safety at all points is to be ensured. The same procedures shall 

be followed in the case of the trapped people or cyclone/flood -marooned people.

STAGE-III

Search of Possible Survival Points (Specialised Rescue)
Any chances of a person being trapped or injured are to be searched at all possible places 

and all options. The rescue team should try with all means to rescue with the appropriate 

method. Consider safety as top priority.

STAGE-IV

Selected Debris Clearance (Specialised Rescue)
The rescue team should search until all the persons are accounted for and identities are 

ascertained.

STAGE-V

General Debris Clearance (Specialised Rescue)
Clear up the debris and reach to the trapped persons, when all possible ways of contacting 

the trapped persons has failed. Specialised Rescue Teams should preferably carry out 

the last three stages.

EMERGENCY RESCUE
Sometimes rescue materials are not available to the rescue team at site in emergency 

situations. There are various other methods, which could be useful for rescue. Such 

methods are known as, “Emergency Methods of Rescue”. The adequate methods of 

rescue is to be determined depending upon the nature of the casualty, the nature of the 

injuries and the position in which the casualty is found.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 39

RESCUES WITH ONE RESCUER
Human Crutch.
The rescuer acts as crutch to the injured. This method is used when the casualty is in 

a position to help them. The rescuer stands and assists the injured to place their arm 

around the shoulder. The rescuer grasps it with the hand. At the same time, the rescued 

place the other hand around the injured person‘s waist and assist the person to move. 

This is called “Human Crutch”.

Pick-a-back
This method is applicable only when the casualty is 

conscious, without any injury but not able to walk. 

The rescuer lifts the injured person onto his/her back. 

The victim holds on with his legs and arms around 

the waist and neck of the rescuer. The rescuer passes 

both hands behind and back or under the knees and 

supports the injured person. This is known as “Pick 

a-Back” method.

Pick-a-Back (Reverse)
This method 

is required when the casualty 

is 

conscious with an injury such as a burn on the belly 

or chest, wound on the neck or face (upper part of 

the body). The rescuer supports the patient as leans 

backward against the rescuer.

The rescuer passes both hands backwards and grips 

around the waist of the injured person. The rescuer 

leans forward and lifts the injured person off their 

feet and upon the rescuer’s back. This method is 

known as the “Pick-a-Back (Reverse).

Fireman’s Lift.
“Fireman’s Lift” is a nine-step method to lift the 

casualty and carry, If the casualty is unconscious but 

without injury to the body. It is an easy method for 

a single rescuer to carry the casualty down from the 

higher elevated areas or bring the casualty up from 

the basement via upper stairs and ladders also.

a) 

If the casualty is laying on his / her back, the 

rescuer kneels on one knee.

Step 1

40

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

b) The rescuer turns the casualty on his/ her back gently, supporting 

the face of the casualty with one hand and the forearm of the 

casualty with other.

c) The rescuer then puts his/ her hands underneath the armpits 

of the casualty and lifts the chest of the injured, first onto the 

rescuer’s knees.

d) The rescuer then gradually lifts the casualty up to a kneeling 

position of the casualty.

e) The hands of the rescuer are then passed the casualty is lifted 

on to their fee around the body of the casualty.

f) The casualty is lifted on to their feet. The body of the casualty is 

to be supported against the body of the rescuer.

g) The rescuer then faces the casualty sideways and holds any 

wrist of the casualty, passed over the shoulder of the rescuer, 

with the other hand.

h) The rescuer then bands down and picks up the casualty on to 

the shoulder, one hand of the rescuer now passes in between 

the legs and the other hand holds the wrist of the casualty.

i) The rescuer now lifts the casualty and transports.

Rescue Crawl
This method is applicable when the casualty is found unconscious, in 

a smoke filled room, or in a confined place limiting movement or the 

casualty is too heavy.

Steps:

Step 2

1. Gently turn the casualty on their back and tie their wrist together 

using a triangular bandage or handkerchief, napkin etc.

2. The rescuer kneels astride the casualty facing their head, and places their head 

through the loop formed by their arms. In one palm hold and neck and head of 

the casualty to avoid sweating or further injury.

3. The rescuer crawls forwards on; their hands and knees and drags the casualty 

forwards along the ground.

Removal Downstairs:
This method is applicable when a casualty is found on the up-stair floors but not in 

position to be transferred via the staircase. The rescue of the casualty has to be done 

with specific procedures as detailed below; 

• 

To move a casualty downstairs, lay him/her on his/her back and tie his/her wrists 

together. With his /her head pointing downwards on the stairs, the rescuer will 

keep their arm under his /her armpits so; that his /her head rest on the rescuers 

arm, and ease him/ her downstairs.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 41

Bowline Drag
This method of rescue is useful, when a casualty is found in a narrow space/confined area. 

Turn the casualty onto his /herd back and tie his/her wrist together using a triangular 

bandage, handkerchief, napkin etc.

1. Use a sash cord of 15 feet (4.5mtrs) length or 40 ft. (12mtrs) lashing line, tie a 

Bowline at each end to form the loops.

2. Place one loop over the casualty’s chest and under his /her armpits, with the knot 

resting under his/her head so that it will keep his /her head off the ground while 

he /she is being pulled.

3. The rescuer will place the other loop over their shoulders and under the armpits, 

forming a harness with the knot in line with the center of the back or between the 

shoulders.

4. The rescuer drags the casualty out by crawling on their hands and knees.

Toe Drag
This method of rescue is required when a casualty is found in a narrow place where the 

Rescuer finds difficulty enters.

1. The rescuer sits down at the casualty’s head-side and places his/her feet under the 

casualty’s armpits.

2. With both hands free, the rescuer pulls him/her back and at the same time drags 

the casualty with his / her feet.

MORE THAN TWO RESCUERS
These methods are suitable when two or more rescuers are available for rescue.

Two-Handed Seat
Two rescuers face one another on either side of the casualty, bend down, and pass his/ 

her arm under the casualty’s back, below the shoulders, and grip his/her clothing.

The casualty’s back is raised and the rescuers slip their other arms under the middle of 

his/her thighs holding their hands with a handgrip. The casualty is lifted and the rescuers 

move with short pace.

42

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Three-Handed Seat
This method is used for carrying a casualty who is conscious, heavier or might have 

bleeding or injured to one of the legs.

1. Two rescuers face each other and keep their hands to form a threehanded seat as 

shown in the picture.

2. One of the rescuers provides support and holds the injured person’s limb in the 

free hand.

3. The rescuers support the casualty to sit on; the three-handed seat. The victim is 

carried and the rescuers supports his/ her injured limb.

Four-handed Seat
This method is useful when the victim is heavy but 

without any injury.

1. Two rescuers face each other and keep their 

hands as positioned in the picture to form a 

four handed seat.

2. The rescuers support the casualty to sit onto 

the so formed seat and the casualty puts one 

arm or both arms around the necks of the 

rescuers. The rescuers transfer the causality 

with short paces.

Fore and After Method

In this method a casualty who has an injury in the 

abdomen and is unable to move can be rescued. 

The rescuers place the casualty onto his /her back. 

One rescuer raises and holds the casualty through 

the shoulders passing his/her hands under the arms 

from behind and clasping them in front of the chest 

as shown in the picture. The other rescuer takes one 

leg under each arm and the casualty is transported.

Two-Person Human Crutch
This method can be used when the victim is injured conscious and can help, but is unable 

to walk.

a) Rescuers take up their positions either side of the casualty.

b) Place the victim’s arms round the shoulders and grasp his/her wrists with the 

other hands.

c) Pass the arms round the victim’s waist, grasping the clothing at the hip and 

assisting him/her as crutches.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 43

Clothes Lift
This method is applicable when the casualty is found in a condition that he /she 

cannot move himself /neither she nor any equipment is available with the rescuers for 

transportation of the casualty.

Four rescuers are required for this lift. Two rescuers kneel on either side of the casualty, 

at the shoulders and hips, and turn him / herd onto his / her back.

The rescuers hold the casualty’s clothing and the collar of person’s shirt or dress behind 

the neck with one hand, and with the other hand holds the clothing at his her side.

The rescuers will hold clothing at the causality at the hips with one hand, and at the same 

time control the casualty’s arms. With the other hand they hold the casualty’s trousers, 

pant or dress, thus supporting his /her legs. Now the rescuers can move with short places.

Blanket Lift
This method 

is applicable when the 

rescuers do not have a stretcher to carry the 

casualty who is found in a grave condition 

and is to be shifted in a flat position.

• 

In line with the casualty, place the 

blanket lengthwise on; the ground 

and roll up half of its width. Carefully 

turn the victim onto their side.

• Place the rolled-up portion of the 

blanket close to the victim, and 

gently place onto their back upon 

the unrolled portion of the blanket.

• Unroll the rolled portion accordingly 

so that the victim lies in the center 

of the blanket.

• Roll up the two edges of the blanket 

against the casualty’s body, hold 

by two rescuers on either side of 

the casualty and support the head 

shoulders, hips and legs.

Step 1

Step 2

44

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

RESCUES FROM DAMAGED BUILDING
Precautions Before Entering the Damaged Building;

a) Observe the construction of the building and collapsed portions

b) Check whether the walls need any supporting.

c) Be careful for possible hazards, which may occur form the exposed household 

equipment.

d) Precautions when Entering the Damaged building

e) Use a helmet

f) Work in pairs

g) Listen for possible sounds

h) Keep calling

i) Do not touch or disturb any damaged walls or blocked doors which are broken 

and /or projecting.

j) Treat all necked wires as live wire

PRECAUTIONS WHILST MOVING INSIDE THE DAMAGED BUILDING

• Do not ignite fire.

• Keep close to the walls

• Be careful in all of your movements.

• Do not pull anything projecting out from the collapsed portions.

SEARCH AND RESCUE DURING ADVERSE CONDITIONS: 
Rescuers to immediately take up, the rescue activities after a cyclone, flood, fire and 

earthquake where people might be trapped by fallen debris and in need to be rescued 

without delay. The community rescuers shall have to be in readiness to respond quickly, 

when a cyclone or flood is likely to strike .The rescue or wet ropes. Single sheet bend is 

formed by making a loop in the thicker one of the two ropes, hole the rope in one hand, 

enter the thinner rope upwards through the loop forming a half hitch around the two 

thickness or rope.

Double Sheet-Bend
This is required to join two ropes of different 

materials or when there is a great difference in the 

sizes of the ropes. It is formed somewhat like the 

Single Sheet-Bend, except that after having made the 

Half Hitch with the thinner rope, continue turning its 

short end to make another round turn around the 

two thickness of the thickness of the thicker drops 

and towards the bight.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 45

CHAIR KNOT

Step 1

Step 2

Chair Knot
It is useful for rescue, and then recovers the rope very easily. The 

chair knot is used to rescue a sling in which a person may be lowered 

from heights. Grasping the rope near its center in the left hand palm 

downward, right hand palm upwards forms it. Turn the left palm 

upwards forming a loop (anti-clock wise) and turn; the right hand 

palm down forming a loop. Pass the standing part through the loops 

of the opposite hand pulling them through, thus forming two loops 

with a knot in the center adjust the loop, and make a half hitch on 

each loop. The Chair knot is prepared.

This is useful to recover the casualty from under the debris or from 

basement, where the rescuer has to crawl to the casualty and back 

Step 3

again. Take the running end of the rope in one hand, pull it across 

the upturned palm of the left hand, through the fingers of the left 

hand, forming a loop to required size, pass the running end, which is; 

held in the right hand, up through the loop. Tighten the two ends. It 

can also be converted into a running Bow-line by simply passing the 

knot under the standing part. A running baseline can be put on a ring 

bold or object to drag an object floating debris, animals or human 

body standing from a remote place.

Lashings
Lashing means to “tie something firmly to something else”. Lashing 

is mainly used to secure two or more poles together. There are four 

common types of lashings.

Square Lashing
This is used for lashing together two poles that touch and cross at 

right angles. Put a clove hitch around the spar or leg and below the 

crosshead or ledger. Marry the running end to the standing parts 

tie up and around both the poles as shown in the figure. Repeat this 

circuit three to four times, drawing the rope as tightly as possible. 

Then take three to four flapping turns around the whole lashing 

between the poles. Tighten off with a clove hitch on the vertical pole 

above the horizontal.

Step 4

Used as a sling for rescue when a person 
may be lowered from a height and then to
recover the rope very easily. Used as a 
sling for rescue when a person may be 
lowered from a height and then to
recover the rope very easily.

Square Lashing:
Used for lashing together two poles that 
touch and cross at right angles.

46

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Diagonal Lashing:
Used for lashing together two poles that 
touch and cross at an angle and the poles 
are likely to spring apart when put under 
load or strain.

Figure of Eight Lashings:
For lashing three poles together to form 
a tripod.

Round Lashing:
For lashing two poles together when they 
are parallel to each other to form a sheer 
leg.

Diagonal Lashing
This is used for lashing two poles where they cross at an angle and 

the poles are likely to spring apart when put under load or strain. Put 

a hitch around both the poles horizontally. Then take four vertical 

turns and draw them tight. Then take four horizontal runs and draw 

them tight. To finish put four turns over the lashing and between the 

poles. Draw them tight and end with a clove hitch.

Figure of Eight Lashings
This is used for lashing three poles together to form a tripod’s before 

lashing, insert spacers between the poles. Marry the ends and 

working upwards continue lashing in the figure of eight fashion with 

6-8 turns. Add two to three turns between each pole and round the 

lashing. Finish with a clove hitch above and on the opposite to the 

starting pole.

Round lashing
This is used for lashing two poles together, when they are parallel 

to each other to form a sheer leg. This is also called sheer lashing. 

Before starting, insert spacers between the poles. Put a clove hitch 

around one pole and marry the ends and continue with 6-8 close 

turns around both; the poles, going upwards Add 2 or 3 turns around 

both the poles going upwards. Add 2 or 3 turns around the lashing 

and between the poles. End with a clove hitch above and on the 

opposite pole to the starting pole.

STRETCHER AND CASUALTY TRANSPORTATION
Wounded casualty is to be transported with utmost safety to avoid 

further risk. It may happen that the trained rescuers have to rescue 

the causalities from a collapsed structure, to from a confined place, 

or on the uneven ground with obstacles. Different techniques are 

required for different ground conditions. The knowledge of First Aid 

Services and adequate transportation of the casualty is important 

for the rescuers. In case of shock or serious injuries, the patient 

needs warmth, this could be provided by using blankets.

Standard Ambulance Stretcher
The standard stretchers used in the Ambulances are 230 cm pole 

length, 180 cms canvas 57 cms width, and 15cms height from the 

ground and weight about 14 kegs.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 47

Improvised Stretcher Preparation
Very often the rescuers do not find a standard stretcher in rural areas or during a big 

emergency, in such situations stretchers could be improvised from the locally available 

materials. Collect two or three shirts or thick materials. Inserted two equal sized bamboo 

poles in between the shirts. Keep both the poles separated by tying both sides with short 

pieces of bamboo. The stretcher is prepared. Collect two paddy/sugar sacks, make small 

holes in both edges (vertical) of the sacks and insert two poles. The stretcher is prepared. 

Wooden planks, doors covered with straw or clothes can be used as stretchers. The 

charpai (rope bed) can be used as a stretcher.

Stretcher Carriage
Between two rod four bearers of equal height can carry a stretcher. The stretcher could 

be carried by hand or on the shoulders. Two bearers are sufficient on a level ground and 

without obstacles.

Four Stretcher Bearer Loading
Keep the stretcher at about 1mtr. Distance from the casualty. Three rescuers on one side 

and one on the other side will lift the patient onto the knees of the three rescuers side. 

The 4th rescuer will prepare the stretcher with the blanket, and place the stretcher under 

the patient. Then all four rescuers will lower the casualty onto the stretcher. The rescuers 

will all simultaneously lift the stretcher at one to avoid patient imbalance.

Two Stretcher Bearer Loading
Two bearers will prepare the stretcher and place it parallel to the casualty. Both the 

bearers stand at the hand and the foot of the casualty, together they left and place the 

patient.

Securing the Casualty to a Stretcher
A casualty has no danger of slipping upward to downward on a level ground when carried 

horizontally on a stretcher, however the causality needs securing to the stretcher to 

prevent from slipping in more uneven terrains. It may happen that the casualty needs 

to be carried by a stretcher from the basement, lowered from an upper floor, or carried 

over rough ground. Where the bearers may stumble and the casualty may stumble and 

the casualty into the stretcher. Tie the right head side of the stretcher handle with clove 

hitch and pass the rope of about inches and take a round over the chest of the casualty 

and under the stretcher with Half-Hitch knot. The second and third round is made over 

the body. The third round should be placed below the knees.

Secure the feet and the ankles with rope. Tie the end with the handle. The casualty is 

secured to the stretcher.

48

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Precautions:
The lashing should not be secured so tightly around the casualty as to hurt the injured 

part or to interfere with their breathing. The hitch around the feet and ankles must be 

sufficiently tight to hold the casualty firmly, when the stretcher is held up vertically.

WATER RESCUE
Flood and cyclone disasters take thousands of human lives every year; rescue 

from water related disasters is one of the important challenges for the rescuer. 

The rescuers must be equipped with swimming and floating aids and should have 

adequate swimming capacity for rescuing the drowning casualty. The rescuers must 

have knowledge and practice of swimming in order not to risk him /her whilst rescuing 

the victims.

Use of life Jackets
Life Jackets in rescue are important for water rescue. Add life jacket is a standard life 

saving equipment, which gives confidence to the rescue that he /she is safe. The life 

jacket is made out of waterproof canvas and is filled with; fine cotton, weighing about 

4 kegs equivalent 8.82 (pounds). Normally the life jacket is to be worn like a jacket, 

and has three tying ropes to secure the jacket.

Improvised Swimming and Floating Aids
Standard manufactured life jackets may not be available in rural areas or during an 

emergency, however swimming and floating aids could be improvised from the locally 

available materials.

Empty Tins and Jerricanes.

Steps for preparing floating equipment:

1. Collect 20 ltr. capacity empty tins.

2. Seal the openings of the empty tins.

3. Collect two equal size 4 feet (120 cm) bamboo pieces.

4. Place both the tins with a gap of 1.5 feet (45 cms) from each other or equal to 

the width of the chest of the rescuer.

5. Tie the empty tins with the bamboo poles at two places with coconut fibber 

ropes by square lashing, and tighten as far as possible to prepare the floating 

aid .

6. This can help to float a person in the water. The rescuer can use the device for 

water rescue also.

7. Empty and air tight 15 ltr. Capacity Jerricanes also could be used as floating 

aids

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 49

Empty glass bottles

1. Collect 8 empty bottles of 750 ml capacity.

2. Seal the openings of the bottles with polythene or waterproof materials to 

make them airtight

3. Tie each bottle at two places at the bottom edge and at the neck edge by using 

clove hitch and thumb knots in a series to prepare the floating aid as shown in 

the picture. This can help to float a person in the water.

Dry Coconuts
Collect dry coconuts. Continue adding the numbers of coconuts until, these can carry 

the weight of the rescuer. Tie the dried coconuts with coir fibbers to prepare the 

swimming aid. This can help to float a person in the water.

Bamboo Bundles
Collect bamboo pieces of 1.5feet to 2 feet length (45 cms- 60 cms). Continue adding 

the numbers of the bamboo pieces until sufficient amount that can carry the weight 

of the rescuer. Tie the bamboo pieces with coir fibbers to prepare the swimming aid. 

The swimming aid can help to float a person in the water.

Metal pitcher
Collect 2 metal pitchers. Cover the openings with polythene or any waterproofing 

materials, place the two pitchers within a gap of 1.5d feet (0.5 mtr) or according to the 

width of the rescuer. Tie the two pitchers with two bamboo pieces of 4 feet (120 cms) 

length with coconut fibber ropes and tighten as strong as possible.

The swimming aid is prepared. This can help to float a person in the water. The rescuer 

can use the device for water rescue also. This is also known as “ pot water wing”.

Motor Tubes
Collect good leak-proof motor tubes (Jeep, Truck, Car, Bus only). Fill up with air. The 

swimming aid is prepared. This can help to float a person in the water. This also can 

be used for water rescue.

Raft
During flood or cyclones availability of boats for rescue is likely to be difficult. Rafts 

could be improvised from locally available materials and used for rescue and relief 

activities. Collect 4 good quality empty barrels of 200 ltrs capacity (Kerosene barrels). 

Seal the empty barrels to make watertight. Tie the empty watertight barrels with a 

bamboo frame as shown in the figure. Ensure the Raft is fixed properly with ropes 

and becomes compact. 8-10 persons with safety can be transported on one Raft.

50

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Breast- Line (Life-Lines)
Water rescuers and lifeguards practice “Breast-line-Throw” for life saving. Breastline- 

Throw is life saving skill. This can help and save the life of an individual who is drowning 

in water. This method has the additional advantage that the person who is throwing 

the line will be standing either in a boat or on the ground, steadily able to rescue the 

individual who is drowning.

Rules of Breast-Line-Throwing:
Breast- Line should be a minimum of 40 to 60 feet long (16 mtrs to 20 mtrs), of 1.5 

inch rope (3.5 cms) thickness. Breast- Line should be thrown in the same fashion as 

we do in case of a “ Discuss Through or Fishing Net”, the only difference being, that 

while doing a Breast-line throw we do not take a full circle but throw the rope by 

swinging the hands.

RESCUE EQUIPMENT

Personal Equipments for Rescuer

• Helmet

• Torch

• Life-line

• Gum-Boots

• Life-Jackets (Water Rescue)

• Whistle

Team Equipments for Rescuer

• Rope-3-inch (7 cms) diameter of 200 ft (61.5 mtrs)

• Lashing lines-1.5 inches (3.8cms) circumference of 40 ft (12.32 mtrs) length

• 6 Sash-cord-inch (2.54cms)

• Pulley blocks with different sheaves

• Ladder (Wood/Bamboo)

• Small cutting tools

• First Aid Box

• Life Buoy

• Crow Bar

• Hammer

• Stretcher

• Blanket

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 51

MORE ILLUSTRATIONS METHODS:

52

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 53

54

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 55

56

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Part III

CHAPTER

10

BASIC INTRODUCTION TO THE BODY

The human body is both complex and diverse with several distinct systems that work 

closely together to allow us to live our life in work, rest and play. The body is made up of 

trillions and trillions of cells and medical scientists cannot be more precise than this as 

the cells in the body are constantly changing.

To understand illness, we first need to understand the body in health. For your role as a 

Community First Responder we will only require you to have a very basic knowledge of 

anatomy and physiology and a small insight are provided on the following pages.

Included are general introductions to:

• Skeletal system in health and illness

• Respiratory system in health and illness

• Circulatory system in health and illness

• Nervous system in health and illness

These sections are simply to provide some background knowledge and will be expanded 

upon throughout your course.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 57

10.1 THE SKELETAL SYSTEM

Functions of the Skeleton

• 

Support for the soft tissues of the body, giving shape and form. To provide a 

point of attachment for the skeletal muscles.

• Protection of the vital organs such as the brain, heart and lungs.

• Movement is facilitated by the bones and joints of the skeleton which act as 

levers to the muscles that are attached.

• Mineral storage in the bones which are distributed to other parts of the body 

when ineeded.

• Blood cells that are red and carry oxygen and some white cells that help fight 

infection are produced in the marrow of certain bones.

The skeleton is made up of 206 bones that vary in shape and form but one common 

feature is that they may fracture as a result of injury. Other injuries such as a 

dislocation may also occur if the joint is put under excessive force.

Types of injury likely to cause fractures to bones are

• Direct force which cause damage to that particular area or

• 

Indirect force when during a fall a person lands on an outstretched arm and 

dislocates/fractures the shoulder joint.

You will cover different types of injury to the skeletal system and their treatment in 

greater details throughout the induction course.

58

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

10.2 THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

The Respiratory system has four principle functions:

• 

• 

Extract oxygen from the atmosphere and transfer it to the bloodstream in the 

lungs

Excrete water vapour, carbon dioxide and other waste gases

• Maintain the normal acid-based content of the blood

• 

Ventilation of the lungs.

All parts of the body consume oxygen, and produce carbon dioxide as a waste 

product. To cover this need, respiration takes place internally (at the cellular level) 

and externally (ventilation/breathing).

Ventilation involves the inhalation of atmospheric air which contains approximately 

20-21% oxygen into the lungs via the nose and mouth through branching 

passageways into the right and left lungs, and the exhalation of carbon dioxide 

reversed through the same route comprising approximately 4-5% within exhaled 

air. The key function of the lungs is to bring air and blood into intimate contact 

within the alveolar air sacs so that oxygen can enter the blood and carbon dioxide 

may leave.

At rest, humans breathe at a rate of approximately 12 to 20 times per minute, 

bringing in approximately 500ml (1 pint) with each breath. Exercise and certain 

diseases such as asthma, emphysema and bronchitis may result in a marked 

increase of breathing rate and effort. The respiratory system is also crucial in 

maintaining a normal blood acid balance (PH 7.35) and body temperature.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 59

10.3 THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM

The human circulatory system basically resembles a simple closed plumbing 

network consisting of a pump (heart), tubes (arteries and veins) and fluid (blood 

that carries oxygen) The heart is a hollow organ that lies between the lungs and is 

often compared in size with the owner’s fist.

It has two upper chambers (atrium) that receive blood and two larger lower 

chambers (ventricles) with one responsible for pumping blood to the lungs the 

other to the rest of the body. This pumping action of the heart causes it to beat 

approx 60-100 times per minute or 100,000 times a day sending the blood through 

an average 60-70,000 miles of blood vessels.

The heart is made up of three distinct layers:

• An outer layer (pericardium) that prevents over distension of the heart with a special 

fluid that allows for smooth movement.

• A middle layer that consists of very specialised muscle tissue (myocardium) created 

out of cells that are able to function/pump automatically.

• An inner layer (endocardium) that has a very smooth lining which prevents local 

blood clotting.

The arteries carry oxygenated blood from the left side of the heart, under pressure, to 

the whole of the body, whilst the veins carry deoxygenated blood from all areas of the 

body back to the right side of the heart to be pumped back to the lungs for waste disposal 

and oxygenation.

60

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Many problems can occur with the heart including:

• Heart attack

• Angina

• Conduction system failure

• 

• 

• 

Left Ventricular Failure

Infection

Injury

ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION SYSTEM OF THE HEART
When we look at the circulatory system, we can see that the heart is divided into a pump 

(heart), tubes (blood vessels) and fluid (blood). However we also need to understand 

how our heart harnesses the energy to become a self regulating body component that 

effectively delivers life giving oxygen to every cell, tissue and organ of our body.

The heart has a unique pathway that allows a wave of electrical activity to spread from 

the upper chambers of the heart through to the lower chambers and thus creating a 

wave of contraction within the heart muscle. This electricity is created through a complex 

movement of chemicals which are already present naturally within both the cells and 

the body. This contraction forces blood from the upper chambers through to the lower 

chambers and then to the lungs and the body as a whole.

The normal controlling part of the heart is the pacemaker and is best described as a 

group of specialised cells situated within the right upper chamber of the heart that in 

medicine is called the Senatorial (SA) node.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 61

If working correctly and we were able to view this electrical activity on an electrocardiogram 

(ECG), it would show a rhythm that health care professionals recognise as normal sinus 

rhythm (NSR).

The heart rhythm can for many reasons vary from this natural course and may need 

medicine or medical procedures that are beyond the scope of this pre-learning text and 

your Induction course. However, there are life threatening rhythms that will be recognised 

by an Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) that are used by CFR’s in the community.

10.4 THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

The adult brain is made up of approximately 100 thousand billion neurons (or brain 

cells) and is one of the largest and arguably most important organs of the human 

body.

A complex computer, our brain is the centre that:

• 

Stores information

• Controls emotion

• Manages our intellect

Our brain can also excite, be creative and direct our behaviour toward others. The brain 

is made up of several key areas but the area we need to be aware of as a CFR is the 

autonomic (automatic) part of our brain stem.

62

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Our brain and brain stem communicates with other parts of the body via electrical signal 

transmitted down the spinal column and into individual nerves into connective tissue.

Some of the important functions of our brainstem

• Regulates both the rate and force of our heart beat

• Regulation of the diameter of our blood vessels to govern our blood pressure

• Coughing

• Swallowing

• Sneezing

• Vomiting

The nervous system is an incredibly complex area and during your induction course, the 

tutor will guide you through the relevant features in health as well as illnesses that may 

affect the casualty including:

• Head Injuries

• Stroke

• Epilepsy/Seizures

• 

Febrile Convulsions

10.5 ASSESSING AND TREATING ILLNESS AND INJURY

The following pages contain information relating to both medical and trauma related 

subjects that you may experience whilst undertaking your role as a Community 

First Responder (CFR) /Fire and Rescue Co-responder.

The supplied information has been deliberately designed to be succinct and concise 

to provide a background knowledge base in readiness for your forthcoming training. 

Further and more in-depth information on the major subjects will be issued to you 

and discussed during your induction course. How these subjects are covered will be 

at the discretion of your tutor but may include:

• PowerPoint presentation

• Working from your Induction booklet

• Group and individual discussion

• Scenarios and the practical elements of your induction course

10.6 HEART CONDITIONS

Introduction
The heart is a very complex organ, made up of many specialised structures designed 

to work in unison. The heart can suffer from a variety of problems with the most 

common being heart attack and angina. However, any patient presenting with a 

suspected cardiac condition can be safely treated in a similar way.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 63

What is a Heart Attack?

A heart attack is also commonly referred to as a Myocardial infarction (MI) and is usually 

caused by a blood clot that stops blood flow within a heart (coronary) artery. ‘MI’ simply 

means that part of the heart muscle suddenly loses its blood supply and without prompt 

treatment this can lead to permanent damage to the affected part of the heart During an 

MI, a coronary artery or one of its smaller branches is suddenly blocked. The part of the 

heart muscle supplied by this artery loses its blood (and oxygen) supply and is at risk of 

permanent damage unless the blockage is quickly undone. (The word infarction means 

the death of tissue due to a blocked artery which stops blood from getting past).

Risk Factors for Heart Problems

• Smoking

• High blood pressure

• Excess weight/obesity

• High Cholesterol/poor diet

• 

Lack of exercise

• Diabetes

• 

Family history

• Certain ethnic groups

How can we help the casualty?
• Provide reassurance
• Encourage and assist the patient to sit slightly reclined and loosen any tight 

clothing (neck/chest)

• Monitor the patient until further help arrives

64

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

10.7 SHOCK

What is Shock?

Shock is a life-threatening condition that occurs when vital organs do not get enough 

oxygen due to reduced blood circulation. The most common cause of shock is severe 

blood loss, but it may also be caused by:

• Severe trauma including fractures and internal bleeding

• Allergic reaction

• Severe burns

• Heart conditions

Signs and Symptoms

• The skin may be cool to touch and pale or grey in colour

• Breathing may be quicker

• Pulse may be rapid and possibly weak

• Nausea and/or vomiting

• 

Feeling of faint or dizzy

• Confusion

• Unconsciousness

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• 

If possible, try to treat the cause (i.e. stem any bleeding and elevate the affected 

limb)

• Advise or assist them to loosen any tight clothing such as collars, ties or belts

• Keep the casualty warm by using a blanket or similar

• Monitor the casualty until further help arrives

• 

If at any time the patient becomes unconscious but continues to breathe normally, 

gently roll them onto their side (recovery position) ensuring that their head is 

tilted gently back

10.8 SEVERE BLEEDING

Introduction

Blood conveys oxygen around the body from the heart via a series of tubes called 

blood vessels. These vessels are called arteries and they take blood that is rich in 

oxygen to every cell of the body and is then returned to the heart via other blood 

vessels called veins.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 65

What is severe bleeding?

Severe bleeding can occur due to damage to an artery, vein or other smaller blood vessels 

and dependent upon the location, size, depth and severity, it can be both dramatic and 

distressing. Severe bleeding can rapidly become life threatening.

How can we help the casualty?
• Provide reassurance

• Examine the wound for any embedded object but do not attempt to remove it
• Try to stem the flow of blood coming out of the wound. Place something clean 

such as a towel, shirt or even the patient’s hand over the wound to help staunch 

the bleed (this will buy time and enable you to don your gloves and prepare a 

dressing)

• Try to minimise the effects of shock

• Help to prevent the risk of infection and be aware of cross-infection between you 

and the casualty

10. 9 BURNS AND SCALDS

What causes burns and scalds?

Burns and scalds may be caused by:

• Thermal – for example flames or hot surfaces (including scalds from hot water, 

steam and fats)

• Electrical

• Friction – rope or carpet burns etc

• Chemical – acids or alkalis etc

• Radiation – Sun/UV etc

How do we recognise that someone has received a burn or scald?

• History of the event from casualty or bystanders

• Redness and/or blistering

• Pain which can be extreme

How can we help the casualty?

Our number one priority must be our own safety and to avoid putting ourselves 

at risk

• Try to stop/remove the cause of the burning/scald

• Cool the burn/scald under tepid running water for at least 10 minutes (20 

minutes if chemical)

• If tap water is not readily available use bottled water etc

• Try to alleviate the pain (this is often naturally achieved during the cooling of the 

burn/scald)

66

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Once cool, cover wound with Clingfilm lengthways over the area avoid wrapping it 

tightly around the limb

• Minimise the risk of infection

• 

If possible, remove anything that will constrict such as jewellery etc

If it is a limb injury, try to raise it above the level of the casualty’s heart

• 
• Treat for possible shock

10.10 FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS

What is a fracture?

Sometimes, excess pressure is applied to a bone which results in the breaking of 

the bone, this is called a fracture. The cause may either come from direct force 

(directly onto the bone) or indirect force (where the force is transmitted through 

one or more bones, injuring another i.e. falling onto an outstretched hand and 

fracturing a collar bone).

Fractures are a very common injury and most people suffer at least one during 

their lifetime. Children’s bones are relatively more flexible and less likely to break 

and falls or other accidents that may not cause harm in a child can easily cause 

complete fractures in older adults. Older adults also generally suffer from fractures 

more than children because their bones are comparatively brittle.

The skin overlying a fracture may be intact (closed fracture) or open and exposing 

the bone (open/compound fracture) which can be particularly dangerous due to 

the high risk of infection. Bones can fracture in several different ways with the 

most common being simple (the fracture occur along one line), avulsion (where a 

fragment of bone breaks off) or comminute (multiple bone fragments).

What is a dislocation?

A dislocation is a separation of two bones where they meet at a joint. (Joints are 

areas where two bones come together). A dislocated bone is no longer in its normal 

position, which may result in damage to ligaments, nerves, and blood vessels.

Dislocations are usually caused by a sudden impact to the joint following a blow, 

fall, or other trauma and can be hard to distinguish from a fracture. Dislocations 

may also have an associated fracture and these can be very dangerous to the long 

term health and viability of the affected limb (such as the ankle and foot).

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 67

Signs and Symptoms of a fracture or dislocation
• Swelling
• Loss of power
• 

Irregularity

• Pain
• Deformity
• Unnatural Movement
• Crepitus (where the bone ends grate together, do not actively look for this!)
• Tenderness
• Bruising

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• You aim is to avoid moving casualty unless absolutely necessary as this will 

increase pain and may exacerbate the damage

• Encourage and assist the casualty to support the affected area

• Control any bleeding if present

• Keep the casualty warm by using a blanket or similar

10.11 FAINTING

What is Fainting?

Fainting can be described as a brief loss of consciousness and is a common 

disorder that may affect people of all ages. Some of the common causes are:

• Anxiety

• Emotional upset

• Stress

• Missing meals

68

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

• Dehydration

• Standing up too quickly

• Standing up for long periods of time

• Existing medical conditions such as

• Diabetes or Low Blood Pressure

• Side effects of medication

Signs and Symptoms

Just before someone actually faints they may exhibit or experience one or more of the 

following signs and symptoms:

• Nausea

• Dizziness

• Excessive sweating

• Rapid heart beat

• Blurred vision

• Anxiety

• Emotional upset

• Stress

• Missing meals

• Dehydration

• Standing up too quickly

• Standing up for long periods of time

• Existing medical conditions such as Diabetes or Low Blood Pressure

• Side effects of medication

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• 

If they are not already on the floor advise/assist them to do so

• Advise or assist them to loosen any tight clothing such as collars, ties or belts

• 

If possibility elevate their feet just above hip level by placing an item under 

their feet/legs

Fainting should be classed as a medical emergency until proven otherwise. The ambulance 

crew will evaluate the casualty’s medical history along with clinical indicators and base 

their treatment accordingly.

10.12 SEIZURES

What is a seizure?

A seizure may be described as the result of a sudden burst of excess/random 

electrical activity within the brain. This causes the brain’s messages to become 

temporarily halted or mixed up. The type of seizure a person has is dependent 

upon the area of the brain where this activity occurs.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 69

Possible causes

• Epilepsy

• Diabetic emergencies

• Head/brain injury

• Alcohol withdrawal

• Poisoning

• Stroke

• Hyper/hypothermia

Recognition

• History of seizures/other relevant history

• 

Loss of consciousness (may be transient)

• Reduced level of response

• Muscle twitching/rigidity/shaking

• 

Incontinence

• Breath holding

• 

‘Glazed’ appearance

• Abnormal/inappropriate behaviour

• 

‘Aura’ (smell, taste, sensation)

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• Make the area safe to reduce risk of injury

• Time the seizure (where possible)

• Monitor the casualty whilst awaiting help

• 

If unconscious but breathing normally, gently roll them onto their side (recovery 

position) ensuring that their head is tilted gently back

Do NOT restrain the patient

Do NOT allow anyone to force the mouth open or force objects into it

Febrile Convulsions / Seizures

Febrile seizures are a relatively common childhood condition, referring to a child having 

a seizure when they have a high temperature most usually as a result of an infection. 

Although febrile seizures may be very frightening, most are harmless and do not pose a 

direct threat to a child’s health.

Most children have what is known as a tonic clonic seizure. During a tonic clonic seizure, 

the child’s body becomes stiff, they lose consciousness and their arms and legs twitch. 

Some children may also wet themselves.

70

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Febrile seizures are quite common with an estimated 1 in 20 children having at least one 

febrile seizure at some point. Most febrile seizures occur between the ages of six months 

and three years with the average age being 18 months.

The actual cause is unknown, although the condition appears to run in some (but not 

all) families. Around 1 in 4 children who are affected by febrile seizures will have a family 

history of the condition; however in half of all cases, there are no obvious causes or risk 

factors. Many parents worry that if their child will develop epilepsy when they get older. 

While it is true that children who have a history of febrile seizures may have an increased 

risk of developing epilepsy, it should be stressed that the risk increase is still quite small. 

How can we help the casualty?

Treat in the same way as an adult seizure (described previously) In addition:

• Suggest that the parents remove most of the child’s clothing (e.g. to baby grow/vest 

& nappy level), but do not allow the child to become hypothermic!

STROKE

What is a Stroke?

A stroke can be described as a brain attack and may occur as a result of either a blockage 

or bleed within one or more of the blood vessels that supply the brain with oxygenated 

blood. When brain cells do not receive sufficient oxygen they will start to shut down and 

die.

Signs and Symptoms

• Weakness

• Numbness and paralysis to one side of the body (face, arms and/or legs)

• Difficult in speaking and swallowing

• Headache

• Confusion

• Vomiting

• Blurred vision

THE F.A.S.T. TEST

Using the simple acronym of ‘FAST’ can help us to recognise if a stroke has occurred:

Facial Weakness – Can the person smile? Has their mouth or eye drooped?

Arms – Ask them to try to raise both arms above their head

Speech – Can the casualty speak clearly and understand what you say?

Time – It is time for us to take action to help the casualty

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 71

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• 

If the casualty is conscious encourage and assist them to sit with their head and 

shoulders gently raised and their legs flat

• Monitor the casualty until further help arrives

• 

If unconscious but breathing normally, gently roll them onto their side (recovery 

position) ensuring that their head is tilted gently back

DIABETES

What is Diabetes?
Diabetes is a common life-long health condition affecting approximately 2.8 million people 
within the UK and an estimated 850,000 people are believed to have the condition, but 
are presently unaware.

It is a condition where your pancreas either does not produce any or enough insulin to 
help glucose enter your body’s cells (Type 1), or the insulin that is produced does not 
work properly (Type 2).

There are two common types of diabetic emergency Hyperglycaemia (High blood sugar)

Flushed, dry skin

• A much rarer emergency call
• Gradual onset (hours to days)
• Slow, deep breathing
• Rapid pulse
• 
• Tiredness, lethargy, drowsiness
• Blurred vision
• Excessive thirst, hunger or urination
• Smell of acetone/pear drops on the breath
• Seizure

Hypoglycaemia (Low blood sugar)

Fast, shallow breathing

• The most common diabetic emergency
• Rapid onset (minutes)
• 
• Slow, bounding pulse
• Pale and sweaty
• 
• 
• Confusion, dizziness & headache
• Hunger
• Seizure
• Unconsciousness

Irritable/confused/aggressive behaviour
Inability to concentrate

72

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

How can we help the casualty?
• Provide reassurance
• 

If conscious: Encourage the patient to eat or drink something with a high sugar 
content if they are able
If unconscious: and breathing normally, gently roll them onto their side (recovery 
position) ensuring that their head is tilted gently back

• 

• Monitor the casualty until help arrives

HYPOTHERMIA
What is Hypothermia?
Hypothermia is defined as a core body temperature below 35°C. This drop in temperature 
may be rapid as in immersion in near-freezing water, or slow as in prolonged exposure 
within a temperate environment.

Who is at risk?

• Very old or very young

• Chronically ill, especially with cardiovascular disease

• Malnourished

• Exhausted

• 

Intoxicated with alcohol or drugs

• Mental impairment, e.g. Alzheimer’s disease

• Underlying medical conditions, e.g, stroke, severe arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, 

spinal cord injuries, burns

Signs of Hypothermia

• Shivering

• Slurred speech

• Abnormally slow rate of breathing

• 

Lethargy and fatigue.

• Depressed level of consciousness (the most common feature)

• Skin is cold to touch and appears grey/blue in appearance.

• The patient’s pulse and respiratory rates may be depressed and/or variable

How can we help the casualty?

• Provide reassurance

• 

If possible, prevent further heat loss by removing the casualty from the cold 

environment and replacing any wet, cold clothing with warm, dry clothing/ 

blankets

• Do not allow the patient to smoke, eat or drink alcohol.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 73

CHAPTER

11

Part IV

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST AID

• Every year thousands of people die or permanently injured because they do not 

receive emergency care in time.

• The time immediately after an accident is known as the “golden hour”. this is the 

time when lives that hang in the balance can be saved by proper emergency care.

• Too often those who arrives first are not trained to give proper care

• As a result, patients who might have been saved die.

• 

• 

First-aid is a special responsibility for which you require proper training.

First Responder is the one who arrives first at the scene.

• Their duty is to give First AID 

11.1 WHAT IS FIRST AID?

Def: Immediate assistance or help to a casualty or sick person by a first aider before 

arrival of medical help.

First Aid should ideally start at :

 The place of injury

 Continue during transportation

 Till a doctor takes charge of the patient

11.2 AIMS OF FIRST AID:

• Preserve Life

• Prevent worsening

• Promote recovery

11.3 GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF FIRST AID:

• Simple and minimum essential procedures only should be carried out . 

• Minimum handling should be done. 

• Prescribed equipment, if not available, improvisation should be made.

74

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

General Hint

• Act confidently and courageously

• If required, use the skilled or unskilled assistance of the onlookers 

• Arrange for speedy, safe and convenient transport.

• Treat shock if it has set in

• Immobilize fracture before moving, using splint and bandage

• Splint limbs badly damaged

• Don’t remove clothing, cut it open, if required

• Don’t apply wet dressing

• Don’t give drinks to unconscious or belly wound casualty

• Don’t try to do more than just is necessary

• Remember that no case is to be regarded as hopeless.

• Death is not to be assume.

• Ensure final disposal of case to its correct destination

• First aider must not leave the casualty unattended at any time

• Work in close liaison with rescuers

• Do the right things in right order and do them swiftly and correctly.

11.4 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

• Ensure Personal safety ( PPE) 

• Ensure scene safety

• 

Identify yourself & Consent 

• Treat life-threatening injuries

• Carry out initial assessment

• General impression 

• Assess responsiveness 

• Assess (A)airway

• Assess (B)breathing

• Assess (C)circulation

• Updating incoming EMS

11.5 CARDIO-PULMONARY RESUSCITATION(CPR) 

This is a life –saving procedure done to revive an unconscious Victims with no 

breathing & heartbeat.

When to give CPR?

• Unconsciousness

• No signs of breathing

• No pulse

• Pupils wide open

• Very pale in appearance

• 

Increasing blue or grey color of the skin

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 75

Objectives of CPR

• The key principle is to oxygenate and circulate the blood to all tissues and vital 

organs of the body until advanced cardiac life support can be provided by the 

trained emergency personnel. 

• The shorter the time between the cardiac arrest and the beginning of CPR, greater 

is the chance of survival of the casualty 

Sequence of CPR

• Determine unresponsiveness

• Activate EMS 

• Check ABC`s

• Airway: Head- tilt Chin-lift or Jaw thrust.
• Breathing :LLF, If patient is not breathing, provide two rescue breathing (small 

Puffs for infants)

• Circulation: Check Carotid pulse for adult and child and brachial for infants .If no 

pulse, start CPR immediately.

ASSESSING THE VICTIM

Make sure the victim, any bystanders, and you are safe. 

• Check the victim for a response.

• Shake shoulders gently

• Ask “Are you all right 

• 

• 

If he responds

Leave as you find him.

76

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

• 

Find out what is wrong.

• Reassess regularly 

• 

If he does not respond:

• Activate Code Blue and get AED

• 4 --Keeping the airway open, look, listen, and feel for normal breathing. 

• OPEN AIRWAY 

• 

Look, listen and feel for NORMAL breathing

• Do not confuse agonal breathing with NORMAL breathing 

Keeping the airway open, look, listen, and feel for normal breathing. ……OPEN AIRWAY

Look, listen and feel for NORMAL breathing

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 77

If he is breathing normally;

• 

• 

Turn him into the recovery position 

Send or go for help, or call for an ambulance 

• Check for continued breathing.

If he is not breathing normally

• Give 2 rescue breaths

• Pinch the nose

• Take a normal breath

• Place lips over mouth

• Blow until the chest rises

• Take about 1 second

• Allow chest to fall

• Repeat 

78

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

CHEST COMPRESSIONS 30 CHEST COMPRESSIONS

TECHNIQUES FOR OPENING AIRWAY

• Head-Tilt Chin-Lift method – Method of choice. Do not use this method if you 

suspect head, neck or spinal injury.

• 

Jaw Thrust method – only maneuver recommended on an unconscious patient 

with suspected head, neck or spinal injury.

• Precautions: Always keep the patient’s slightly open- use your thumb to hold 

down the patient’s lower lip.

Head -Tilt Chin – Lift 

Jaw thrust

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 79

Carotid pulse

CHEST COMPRESSION FOR ADULTS (8 & ABOVE)

• Position the Patient

• Expose the Patient’s chest

• Get in position: kneel close to the pt’s side, with your knees about as wide apart 

as your shoulder

• 

Locate the Compression site

• Position your hands, shoulders. 

• Perform Chest compressions: Keeping your arms straight and your elbows locked.

CPR FOR ADULT ( 8 YEARS & ABOVE)

80

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

ADULT CPR (8 YEARS & ABOVE)

• Compression depth : 4-5 cm

• Compression rate : 80 – 100 per min

• Each ventilation : 1.5 – 2 sec/breath

• Pulse location :carotid artery

• One-Man Rescuer Cycle : 30(compressions) : 2(breaths)

• Two-Man Rescuer Cycle : 15 : 2

CHEST COMPRESSION FOR INFANTS & CHILDREN (BELOW 8 YEARS)

Usual cause of Cardiac arrest in infants is hypoxia due to injuries, suffocation, smoke 

inhalation etc. You should resuscitate for one minute before alerting EMS.

CHEST COMPRESSION FOR INFANTS & CHILDREN

• Position the Patient : Child same as adult If an infant, Place him or her on your 

forearm, using your palm to support the head.

• Expose the Patient’s chest.

• 

Locate the compression site: In a child same as an adult. In infants, one finger 

below an imaginary line between the nipples.

• Perform Chest compressions: For infant, use the flat part of your middle and ring 

fingers. For child used the heel of one hand.

CPR FOR CHILDREN(1-8YRS)

Child CPR –1 to 8 years of age

• Compression depth : 3-4 cm ( 1/3 to ½ of total chest depth)

• Compression rate ; 80 – 100 per min

• Each ventilation : 1.5 – 2 sec/breaths 

• Pulse location :carotid artery

• One-Man Rescuer Cycle : 30 : 2

• Two-Man Rescuer Cycle : 15 : 2

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 81

CPR FOR BABIES UNDER 1 YEAR (INFANTS)

INFANT CPR – BELOW 1 YEAR

• Compression depth : 1.5 – 2.5 cm ( 1/3 – ½ total chest depth )

• Compression rate : 100 per min or more

• Each ventilation : 1 – 1.5 sec/puffs

• Pulse location : Brachial Artery

• One-Rescuer Cycle : 30:2

• Two-Rescuer Cycle :15:2

Signs of successful CPR

• Successful CPR does not mean the patient survives – it only means that you 

performed correctly. Very few will survive if they do not receive ACLS. The 

goal is to prevent the death of cells and organs for a few crucial minutes. A 

pulse should be felt with every compression.

• The chest should rise and fall with each ventilation/rescue breathing. 

• The pupils may begin to react normally.

• Patient’s skin colour may improve.

• Patient may attempt to move and try to swallow.

• Heart beat may return.

• Monitoring is essential to see if CPR is effective. 

When not to begin or initiate CPR

When any of the signs of certain death are present.

• 

Lividity

• Rigor mortis

• Decomposition

• Still birth

• Other 

82

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Complication caused by CPR

• 

Fracture of the sternum and ribs

• Pneumothorax

• Haemothorax

• Cuts and bruises to the lungs

• 

Laceration to the liver

NB:- Most of these complications are rare. Even if CPR results in complications, the alternative is 

death.

MISTAKES IN PERFORMING CPR

PROBLEM

1- Patient is not on hard surface

2 - Patient is not on horizontal position

3- Head-tilt chin-lift maneuver improperly performed

4- 

Incomplete seal around the patient’s mouth and / or nose

5- Nostrils are not completely pinched and the patient’s mouth is not fully open during 

mouth- to -mouth ventilation

6- Hands not in correct position or compressions incorrectly placed

7-- Compressions too deep or too frequent

8- 

Improper compression / ventilation ratio

RESULT

1- Compressions are not effective

2 - 

If patient’s head is higher than the rest of the body, there is insufficient blood to 

reach the brain

3- Open airway not ensured

4- 

 Ventilations are not effective

5- ventilations are not effective

6- 

Fractured ribs ; fractured sternum, lacerated liver, spleen, lungs or heart or injured 

pleura as a result of fractured ribs

Insufficient amount of blood is pumped

Inadequate oxygenation of blood

7- 

8- 

Once you begin CPR, you should not interrupt for more than a few seconds to check for 

pulse and breathing, or to reposition yourself for the patient. In addition, you interrupt 

CPR to :

• Move the patient onto a stretcher

• Move the patient down a flight of stairs or through a hallway

• 

Loading or unloading the patient onto the ambulance

• Allow for defibrillation or ACLF measures to be initiated

• Recover from physical exhaustion 

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 83

Recovery Position

• Unconscious casualty/victim with breathing.

• What to do ?

• 

Turn to recovery position.

Benefits:

• Airway remains open in stable position.
• Anything coming through the mouth will automatically drain out.
• As the chest is off the ground, breathing becomes easy.
• 

If you have to place the patient in recovery position for long period, change the 
side every 1 hour to prevent pressure sore.

• Recovery position for an Infant:
• Cradle the infant in ipsilateral position on your forearm with head slightly lower 

than the body.

How to recognize closed wounds

• Swelling 
• Tenderness
• Discoloration
• Possible deformity

INJURY TO THE SOFT TISSUES BENEATH UNBROKEN SKIN

84

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Pre – hospital treatment for closed wounds

• Use universal precautions and secure the scene.

• 

• 

 Apply “RICE” method : rest, ice, compress, elevate,

 Monitor the patient for any Rapid changes in vital signs that might indicate 

internal bleeding, which should be treated by a physician.

• Treat for shock.

• Transport the patient as soon as possible.

Bleeding

Internal bleeding due to :
o Damaged organs 
o Fracture pelvis & femur
Symptoms
o Thirst 
o Pale, cool skin
o Vomiting of blood 
o Distention of abdomen
o Change in mental status
Treatment
o Airway care & artificial respiration if needed
o Keep the patient warm
o No oral fluids in patients with abdominal injury

Open wound
o A soft tissue injury resulting in breaking of the skin

Methods of bleeding Control
o Direct pressure
o Elevation
o Pressure point
o Immobilization by splinting
o Pneumatic pressure devices 
o Use of tourniquets (rare)

Direct Pressure

• External hemorrhage is controlled by direct pressure over injury site

 Usually controls bleeding in 4-6 minutes

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 85

Artery must

 Be proximal to injury site
 Overlie a bony structure against which it can be compressed

Elevation
• Venous 

bleeding 

an 
in 
reduced by 
extremity 
elevating extremity above level 
of the heart.

is 

Pressure Point
• Use when direct pressure and 
elevation have not controlled 
hemorrhage 

• Supplement to direct pressure 

86

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Immobilization by Splinting
• 

Extremity injuries immobilized 
by splinting devices or

• Patient fully immobilized on 

long spine board

Pneumatic Pressure Device
• Helps provide direct pressure to 
injury site and immobilization
• Applied over dressed wound 

after bleeding controlled.

Tourniquet
• 
• 
• Use when essential to save patient’s life

Little indication for tourniquet
Last resort 

Pre- hospital treatment for open wounds

• Use universal precautions and secure the scene.
• 1-Expose the wound. Remove all clothing and expose soft tissue. Avoid removing 
clothing by pulling it over the patient’s head . Best method is to remove clothing 
by cutting with trauma scissors.

• Control bleeding. 
• Begin with direct pressure or indirect pressure and elevation. If wound continues 

to bleed use a pressure point. Use a tourniquet only as last resort

• Prevent contamination.
• Remove debris and contamination around the surface of the wound. Do not try 

to remove embedded particles.

• Dress and bandage.
• Use a sterile dressing and secure with a bandage to cover the wound.
• Cover the patient. Keep patient calm.
• 6- Treat for shock.
• Transport the patient as soon as possible.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 87

DRESSINGS & BANDAGES

• Dressing: Any material used to cover a wound that helps control bleeding & also 

aids in the prevention of additional contamination

• Bandage: Any material used to hold a dressing in place

• Occlusive dressing: Any water- resistant material(plastic or waxed paper)applied 

to a wound to prevent the entrance of air & the loss of moisture from the internal 

organs

• Bulky Dressing: Multiple stacked dressings(2-3cm thick)

Benefit

• Control bleeding

• Apply the dressings using aseptic technique

• Cover the wounds completely

• Ensure that the dressing & bandages are firm, fixed & comfortable, but not so 

tight as to affect circulation

• Ensure there are no loose ends that can get caught 

• Avoid covering the fingers

Shoulder Dressing

Ankle Dressing

88

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Torso Dressing

Thigh Dressing

Finger Dressing

Bandaging Unusual Wounds

Impaled Objects

o Do not remove unless impaled in the cheek or obstructing the airway or CPR
o Control bleeding.
o Stabilize the object with a bulky dressing and apply a bandage.

Penetrating Injury

o Cover any open wound completely.
o Examine the patient for possible exit wound.

Avulsion ( skin flap )

o Clean the wound surface
o Return skin flap to original position
o Control bleeding
o Cover with bulky dressing and apply a bandage.

Amputations or unattached avulsion

o Clean the wound
o Control bleeding.
o Apply dressing and bandages.
o Keep amputated part cool and moist, but not wet .

Treating Amputations

o Apply pressure dressing over the stump.
o Use pressure points to control bleeding.
o Take care of the amputated part. Wrap in a sterile dressing. Place in plastic bag and 

keep cool. Do not immerse in water or put directly on ice.

Wounds to the Eyes

o Bandage the good eye to prevent movement of injured eye
o In an unconscious pat6ient, close the eyes before blindfolding the patient to prevent 

the eyes from drying, which may cause blindness.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 89

o Treat an extruded eye the same way as you would treat an eye with an impaled 
object. Do not replace the eye if it has been expelled. Cover it with a cup or card bord 

cone before applying the bandage. 

Wounds to the Ear

o Never probe the ear 
o Never pack it to stop bleeding from the ear canal
o Place a loose, clean dressing across the opening to absorb the fluids
o Do not apply pressure

Pre-hospital treatment for nosebleeds

o Use universal precautions and secure the scene.
o Maintain open airway.
o Pinch nostrils together or place a dressing between the upper lip and the gum and 

apply pressure.

o Keep patient seated and still.
o Do not pack the nose; check for clear fluid (CSF) which may indicate a skull fracture.
o Do not remove any objects you may find inside the nose
o For avulsions, apply a compressive dressing.

Treating Neck Wounds

• Do not delay! Place your gloved hand over the wound.

Place an occlusive dressing over the wound. 
It must be heavy plastic, sized 2 inches larger 
in diameter than the wound site.

Treating Neck Wounds
Seal the dressing with tape on all four sides

90

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

• Cover occlusive dressing with a large gauze dressing. Bring bandage over the 

dressing and wrap it under the opposite armpit. Do not wrap around the neck.

PRE-HOSPITAL TREATMENT FOR INJURIES TO THE NECK

Use universal precautions and secure the scene.

1. 

If there is bleeding from a neck wound, apply slight to moderate pressure with an 

occlusive dressing. Tape down all edges of the dressing to form an airtight seal, to 

avoid air embolism. Do not delay treatment; cover injury with a gloved hand and 

apply direct pressure if necessary.

2. For patient without spinal injury, place patient on left side with a 15-degree incline 

( head lower ), if possible.

3. 

If an object is impaled in the neck, stabilize it in place with bulky dressings. Do 

not remove it.

4. Treat for shock.

PRE HOSPITAL TREATMENT FOR ABDOMINAL INJURIES

• use universal precautions and secure the scene. be alert for patient vomiting.

• 

cover all open wounds

• donot replace exposed internal organs. cover them with thick , moist sterile 

dressing. keep exposed area warm by placing a dressing or towel over the 

occlusive dressing 

PRE HOSPITAL TREATMENT FOR RIB FRACTURES

• Apply a sling and swath to hold the patient’s arm against the injured side of the 

chest Give the patient a pillow or blanket to hold against the ribs for support

• 

If alert , allow the patient to assume a comfortable position

SPLINTING

• Stabilize

• Check distal circulation, motion, and sensation

• Apply splint

• Re-check circulation, motion, and sensation after splint is applied

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 91

SPLINTING EXAMPLES

Ankle Injury

Knee Injury

Lower Leg Injury

Finger Injury

Forearm Injury

Shoulder Injury

Elbow Injury

Sling and Swathe

92

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

EMERGENCY CONTACT NUMBER

NAME

DEPARTMENT

DESIGNATION

PHONE NUMBERS

Annexure - I

State Emergency Operations Centre NSDMA

Control Room

Sl. 
No

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

NSDMA Secretariat

Shri. Johnny Ruangmei

Shri. RendemoShitio

DDMA Kohima

Kohima

DDMA Dimapur

Dimapur

DDMA Phek

10.

Phek

11. DDMA Wokha

12. Wokha

13. DDMA Mokokchung

14. Mokokchung

15. DDMA Tuensang

16.

Tuensang

17. DDMA Longleng

18.

Longleng

19. DDMA Kiphire

20.

Kiphire

21. DDMA Mon

22. Mon

23. DDMA Peren

24.

Peren

25. DDMA Zunheboto

26.

Zunheboto

27. NHAK Kohima

28.

29.

30.

OKING Hospital

Police Control Room

Fire Service

31. NHAK Ambulance

32.

IRCS Ambulance

33. District Ambulance Dimapur

34.

35.

36.

Referral Hospital

Police Control Room

Fire Service

37.

Lions Club Ambulance

NSDMA

NSDMA

NSDMA

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

DDMA

DEF

1070 (toll free)
O370-2291122
0370-2291120

0370-2270050

+91 9856680933

Secretariat

OSD

Coordinator Response +91 9402489435

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

Chairman

S.P

0370- 2290355

0370- 2244286

03862- 226530

03862- 225519

03865- 223037

03865- 223090

03860- 222021

03860- 222015

0369- 2226231/
2226055

0369- 2226207

03861- 220333

03861- 220277

03869- 2236271

03863- 225567

03869- 225551

03863- 225567

03869- 221246

03869- 221271

03862- 267220

03862- 267279

03867- 220325

03867- 220368

0370- 2222916

0370- 2243339

100/0370- 2244279

101/0370-2222952

0370- 2222893

0370- 2244350

03862- 232224

03862- 242533

100/03862- 228400

03862- 232201

03862- 230986/ 
225532

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 93

Annexure - II

Do’s & Don’ts

Earthquake

94

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

Annexure - II

Do’s & Don’ts

Fire

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 95

Landslide

96

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

PRE-LEARNING

QUIZ

Please use these questions to check your understanding and progress with the pre-
learning booklet. 

Do not worry if you cannot remember all the answers, you are free to read the relevant 
sections again to answer the questions.

Q1. What must you consider whilst responding to an emergency incident?
(Hint:You must adhere to all road traffic road laws)

What else must you also consider?

Q2. As a CFR you must make every effort to keep safe. Give three example of how this 
can this be achieved?
1.
2.
3.

Q3. As a CFR you may experience something that might affect you personally when 
attending an incident. Whom may you consider seeking support from?

Q4. When you need to find out information from your patient, list three possible 
communication skills can you use?
1.
2.
3.

Q5. Give 3 examples of what must be present in both adults and children for you to judge 
they are competent to make decisions?
1.
2.
3.

Q6. Who may legally be classed as having parental responsibility?

Q7. If at any time there are any issues regarding consent for assessment or treatment for 
any patient, regardless of age, who must you contact?

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 97

Q8. As a CFR we must respect patient confidentiality at all times and follow a few simple 
rules. Provide three people to whom it may not be appropriate to disclose confidential 
details to:
1.
2.
3.

Q9. To whom may you safely handover patient information to?

Q10. As a CFR you are a vital link in ‘keeping it clean’. What simple rules must you adhere 
to?

Q11. What does T.I.L.E. help you remember?

Q12. The skeleton has several key functions. What are they?

Q13. The skeleton is made up of how many bones?
A) 220
B) 240
C) 206
D) 300

Q14. What two causes of injury are likely to fracture a bone?
1.
2.

Q15. The respiratory system has four principle functions. What are they?
1.
2.
3.
4.

Q16. What is the approximate percentage of oxygen within atmospheric air?
A) 40%,
B) 32%,
C) 25-30%
D) 20-21%

Q17. At rest, what is the approximate breathing rate for an adult?
A) 20-30 per minute
B) 12-20 per minute
C) 27-35 per minute
D) 40-42 per minute

Q18. What factors may lead to an increase in our breathing rate?

Q19. How many chambers does the heart have, and what are their medical names?

Q20. The middle layer of our heart is called the myocardium. What is it made up of?

98

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

A brief selection of standard terms whose meanings are useful to know:

Acute (of disease): Severe, rapidly developing, or of a sudden onset.

Ambulance Technician: Experienced ambulance crew member capable of delivering a 
wide range of drugs and treatments to patients.

Angina: Condition of gripping chest pain associated with disease and the narrowing of 
the arteries of the heart which can be described as cramping of the heart muscle.

Asphyxia: Suffocation by smothering or any condition that prevents oxygen being taken 
up by the blood.

Aspirator: A suction device used in the removal of fluids from the airway and other 
cavities.

Asthma: Tightening or restriction of the lower small airways accompanied by a sense of 
suffocation or tightness of the chest.

Cardiac: Relating to the heart.

Casualty: Any victim of an accident or sudden illness.

Catheter: A tube designed to be passed into a body cavity.

Chronic (of disease): persistent and lasting disease or medical condition, or one that has 
developed slowly.

Communication assistance device: A portable device which may provide a 
communication-challenged person with a means of communication. (i.e. an enhanced or 
artificial voice, script on a monitor screen).

Community Nurse: A nurse who specialises in care for people within their own home or 
local health centres.

Coronary Thrombus: Blockage of one or more of the arteries that supply blood to the 
cardiac muscle usually caused by blood clots and/or fatty tissue.

Cyanosis: A dusky bluish tint to the skin due to a lack of oxygen in the blood.

Diabetes Mellitus: Disease caused by either insulin deficiency or uptake problems.

Dyspnoea: Difficult or laboured breathing.

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL 99

Emergency Care Assistant: Ambulance crew member usually working alongside a more 
experienced colleague in the delivery of emergency care.

Emergency Care Practitioner: Senior and highly skilled ambulance crew member 
capable of delivering advanced medical skills and treatments above and beyond that of 
a Paramedic.

Emergency Operations Centre (EOC): Where 999 calls are received and ambulance 
resources despatched/managed from.

Emphysema: A chronic and debilitating condition affecting the very small airways within 
the lungs, the primary cause being smoking.

Epilepsy: Convulsive seizures caused by a disorder of the normal functioning of the brain.

Fibrillation: Uncoordinated contraction of muscle fibres and cells within the heart.

Hyperglycaemia: High levels of glucose in the blood.

Hypoglycaemia: Low levels of glucose in the blood.

Hypoxia: Low levels of oxygen within the blood and tissues of the body.

Incident: Any accident, occurrence or other unforeseen event requiring an ambulance 
response.

Pacemaker: An apparatus for artificially controlling the rhythm and rate of the heart.

Paramedic: Senior and highly skilled ambulance crew member capable of administering 
a large range of drugs and medical skills.

Personal protective equipment (PPE): Specialised equipment provided for your safety 
such as hi-visibility jacket, gloves etc

Pleurisy: Inflammation of the covering of the lungs.

Pneumonia: Infection of the lung tissue.

Pulmonary: Relating to the lungs.

Response times: The time lapse between notification of an emergency and the arrival of 
an ambulance response.

Tachycardia: A fast heart rate, normally >100 beats per minute.

Vaccination: Immunisation by giving a vaccine.

Vaccine: Substance created from the germs of an infectious disease used to treat that 
disease (vaccine may be either active or inactive).

100

COMMUNITY FIRST RESPONDER

TRAINING MANUAL

