2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

As a library, NLM provides access to scientiﬁc literature. Inclusion in an NLM database

does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National

Institutes of Health.

Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice

J Family Med Prim Care. 2019 Oct 31;8(10):3090–3095. doi: 10.4103/jfmpc.jfmpc_893_19

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review

Nikunj Makwana 1,✉

Author information Article notes Copyright and License information

PMCID: PMC6857396 PMID: 31742125

Abstract

The purpose of this study is to understand the linkages between disaster and its impact on mental

health. To fulfil this objective, an attempt has been made to examine the existing qualitative literature

on disaster and mental health. In this paper, disaster and mental health as a concept has been used in

a holistic sense. Based on the review of literature, the following broad themes have been identified:

natural disaster and its impact on mental health, man-made disaster and its effect on mental health,

effects of industrial disaster on mental health. It examines the post-disaster behavioural and

psychological symptoms associated with an impairment in functioning. By this review, various

protective factors, including resilience and other coping strategies which amplified the individual's

capacity while encountering negative situations, have been identified. The effectiveness of post-

disaster intervention techniques is also highlighted. Better preparedness and community

empowerment can improve the condition of the vulnerable population affected by the disaster. Thus,

efforts should be given for holistic rehabilitation of the affected population.

Keywords: Disaster, mental health, review, protective factors, post-disaster intervention,

rehabilitation

Introduction

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

1/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

Disasters are a complex global problem; it is an inevitable truth of our life. Every year individuals and

communities are being affected by disasters, which disrupts their mental health and well-being.

Economic and social development throughout the world is frequently interrupted by natural

disasters.

The United Nation International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN-IDSR) defines disaster as a

serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society causing widespread human,

material, economic or environmental losses which exceed the ability of the affected community or

society to cope using its own resources. World Health Organization (WHO) defines disaster as a

sudden ecologic phenomenon of sufficient magnitude to require external assistance.

Disasters are mainly of two types - Natural and Man-made. Natural Disasters are the result of

natural causes, for example cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis and tropical cyclones. Man-made

disasters are brought about by human actions, including military conflicts, terrorism, political unrest

and industrial accidents. He further argues that there is a superficial conceptualization of disaster in

terms of natural and man-made. However, research suggests that both natural and social factors

cause disasters, e.g. flooding might be the result of the combination of deforestation and climate

change.

Rationale

Developing countries are more prone to disasters or hazards due to the various challenges like

poverty, lack of resources, lack of educational opportunities, poor infrastructure, and lack of trained

manpower, lack of awareness and knowledge of disaster mental health. Mental health issues, in

general, have been considered as a neglected subject especially in India as it is considered as a

stigmatised problem. Mental health issues caused by disasters are even more neglected area. Thus, in

order to fulfil this gap, there is a need to understand this study.

India is vulnerable to natural disasters and other types of disasters which leads to a significant loss in

the affected population. The aftermath of disasters has a significant impact on the socio-economic

and mental state of the victims. Apart from the government interventions, which focuses on the socio-

economic condition, the psychosocial interventions are also being emphasized. It comprises of

acceptance as a coping skill, which helps the victims to maintain social relationships positively and

also protect and enhance their well-being. The interventions also include the awareness programme

which helps the victims to practically visualize the situation and adopt effective measures to inculcate

patience and resiliency in them. Thus, it helps the victims to adapt to the changes they experience

post-disaster. These interventions assist the victims in normalising their mental health despite their

loss. The victims who might develop psychotic symptoms are guided with the help of psycho-

education and are encouraged to lead a better and positive life.

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

2/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

Conceptualisation

We cannot understand disaster as a standalone issue. Borrowing the conceptualisation of

Quarentelli:

1. A disaster affects the social structure, and it creates an immense barrier on the usual functioning

of the society. The disaster does not have physical consequences only, but it also encompasses

the other domains such as the psychological and psychosocial dimensions.

2. The impact of disasters can be neutralized with the help of some variables like the willingness

for positive psychological adjustment of the victims, the ability of the community to adapt to the

environment.

3. There is no universal definition of disaster. The definition varies from context to context.

4. The coping mechanism helps to minimize the negative impact of disasters on mental health.

Methodology

Using qualitative literature the paper attempt to understand the linkages between disaster and its

impact on mental health. In this study, disaster and mental health as a concept has been used in

holistic sense. For this review, different permutation and combinations of certain keywords such as

‘mental health’, ‘psychological health’, ‘disaster management’, ‘disaster effects’, ‘disaster impact’, etc.,

have been used to identify the relevant literature. Since the study uses a narrative review method, no

typical criteria for inclusion and exclusion have been pre-defined. On the basis of review of literature,

certain themes were developed and elaborated accordingly.

Psychological Effects of Disaster

Disasters and mental health are related to a large extent; the effects of disasters might have a

negative impact on the affected population. Along with the social and economic losses, the

individuals and communities experience a mental instability which might precipitate Post Traumatic

Stress Disorder (PTSD), Anxiety and Depression in the population. Generally, the disasters are

measured by the cost of social and economic damage, but there is no comparison to the emotional

sufferings a person undergoes post-disaster.

Psychological distress is common in the victims, along with socio-economic distress. The

psychological interventions have helped the victims to improve over time, but the most common

mental disorders such as depression and anxiety are expected to increase as a result of negative

impact on mental health.

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

3/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

Disasters are mostly unpredictable, which leaves the victims in a state of shock. The victims tend to

deny the loss and try to escape from reality. Being in a denial state makes the victims more vulnerable

to stress, anxiety and other different maladaptive reactions. Home is a place which provides safety

and security to the people. But, when the unavoidable situations induced by disaster, damage home,

properties other valuable assets, it leads to a feeling of insecurity in the victims. Death of a closed one

also leaves the victim in a state of insecurity because the sense of love, attachment and belongingness

is deprived. There were various factors which lead to the psychological vulnerabilities of the sufferers

such as the displacement of the family, death of a loved one, socio-economic loss, environmental loss,

and lack of mental preparedness for disaster, disruption in the family bond, lack of social support and

negative coping skills.

The psychological effects of the disaster are more drastic among children, women and dependent

elderly population. After any sudden disaster or chronic disaster, they become the most vulnerable

population. Thus, they have special needs, which needs to be taken care. Peek stated that there

are various behavioural, psychological and emotional issues and instabilities observed in older

children and adolescents after the disaster. The psychological impact on children due to disasters can

be in the form of PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder), Depression, Anxiety, Emotional Distress, and

Sleep Disorders.

Effect of natural disasters on mental health

In this section, the impact on mental health post-natural disaster has been emphasised. Thus, the

mental health consequences of natural disaster such as hurricane, floods and tsunami have been

highlighted.

Hackbarth et al.  state that disasters may put the victims in a state of despair and shock. This

traumatic experience disrupts the fully-functioning life of the victims and brings loss for individuals,

families and communities. Families experiencing natural disasters faced a loss of their identity by

losing the work they have been engaged. Also, there is a lack of hope and a disturbance of their roles

in the respective community post-disaster. The loss of resources, loss of daily routine, lack of control

over one's own possessions and loss of social support was associated with elevated levels of acute

psychological distress following Hurricane Hugo . These mental health outcomes developed

various psychological symptoms such as severe stress after the traumatic experience, uncontrollable

stress, and feelings of grief and sadness for a prolonged period of time, substance dependency, and

adjustment problems which affects the proper functioning of the individual as well as the community

resulting in family conflicts.

Various studies have explained the physical and psychological health effects of the flood . For

instance, during and after flood situation people suffering from physical health effects like cold,

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

4/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

cough, flu, sore throat, or throat infections and headaches, skin rashes, gastrointestinal illness, chest

illness, high blood pressure, asthma which results in psychological stress .

Anxiety while rainfall was the most common psychological impact after the flood. Other

psychological health effects such as increased stress levels, disturbance in sleeping, dependency on

alcohol and other drugs and depression have been observed.

Jenkins and Meltzer  explain the mental health impact of the Indian Ocean tsunami, 2004. The

survivors showed a wide range of symptoms related to anxiety, depression and PTSD. The displaced

victims, however, reported the symptoms to a great extent as compared to the non-displaced victims.

Unnecessary fear and adjustment problems were common. The feeling of hopelessness and a constant

state of despair was also seen in the victims. There were a lot of mental health issues in the survivors

from the Nordic countries. The most commonly reported problems were persistent grief, a state of

shock and fear, maladjustment and dysfunctionality. Several victims were diagnosed with mental

disorders comprising of the symptoms such as avoiding a specific situation with a fear of being

rejected or humiliated; a state of constant sadness and uncertainties; failing to understand the causes

and reasons behind the grief; fear of socializing and persistently avoiding social situations.

Effect of man-made disasters on mental health

Nilamadhav Kar  states that after the Mumbai riots in 1992-93, the victims were found to be in a

state of fear, shock and helplessness. The psychological and behavioural symptoms observed were

anger (especially of the females who tried to attempt suicide seeing the mangled bodies of their

husbands), unnecessary fear, state of suspiciousness, paranoia, obsessed thoughts and sexual

inactivity.

Kar  further says that within ten days of a bomb blast in a bus in 1996 at Dausa, Rajasthan,

which was the result of terrorist activity, people reported severe stress, state of helplessness, severe

mood swings and forgetfulness. The most commonly reported symptoms were not being able to feel

one's own self, lack of awareness of the reality, lack of sleep, guilt, loss of interest, fear of

encountering situations, emotional flatness, self-blame, suicidal ideations and consistent worry about

future.

Man-made disasters significantly cause PTSD than natural disasters. Serious injury or death of

someone close was also a significant predictor. Being displaced by the disaster, serious injury to the

victim and the victims witnessing death further aggravate the problem.

Jenkins and Meltzer  explain that the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 had a significant

impact on mental health because of its continuation for three months. The intervention focused on

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

5/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

four areas; the people who provided safety to the workers, the toxicity of the oil spill which affected

the workers, the visitors who came to analyse the disaster and also tried to help the victims, socio-

economic and mental health interventions. The victims reported psychological symptoms which had a

negative impact on their behaviour and mental health. The social, personal and professional life of

the victims were affected, resulting in a disturbance in their functioning.

Effect of industrial disasters on mental health

The biggest industrial disaster in human history is the Bhopal gas leak disaster. Murthy  explains

that the Bhopal disaster is an important landmark for understanding the mental health dimensions of

disasters. There was an increase in the psychopathological symptoms leading to dysfunction in the

day to day activities. Clinical help and care were needed for the people who had acute psychotic

symptoms viz., confusional states, anxiety-depression reactions, reactive psychoses and grief

reactions. The long term care was needed for the psychological problems which resulted from

disabilities, uncertainties of future, broken social units and rehabilitation issues. The victims who had

direct and indirect experiences of the disaster showed prolonged behavioural and cognitive

symptoms for which psychological rehabilitation was needed.

Cullinan et al. , after nine years of the disaster, conducted a study of a gas-exposed population. In

this study some victims were subjected to detailed neurological testing including vestibular and

peripheral sensory function and short-term memory tests. In this study, a high proportion of study

participants were reported a wide variety of neuropsychiatric symptoms such as abnormal taste, an

abnormal smell, abnormal balance, headache, faintness and difficulty to stay awake. The neurological

examination showed that many study participants have central, peripheral and vestibular

neurological diseases.

Kar  says that the Bhopal disaster was associated with a variety of severe form of mental

disorders. Most of the patients were females, and the main diagnoses were neurotic symptoms with

severe anxiety and adjustment problems with disturbance of emotions where depressive symptoms

were common. The patients were not able to adjust with their immediate environment even after

treatment; most of them showed psychotic symptoms and demanded consistent clinical help.

Protective Factors

Wachinger G  examines the emotional domain as a protective factor. Various variables were

studied as a field of emotional goals such as internal locus of control/motivation to get better and

function well. Willingness to control the emotional extremes, self-regulation of one's emotions,

inculcating hope and courage, positive attitude and acceptance of the situations, concern about

oneself and family members and ability of the individual to prepare oneself for effect, could solidify

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

6/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

the internal control. They investigated the cognitive domain and focused on the cognitions and its

relatability to the post-disaster intervention. The cognitive aspect helped the individual in increasing

awareness and remembering the risks related to past disaster experience. The psychomotor field has

been emphasized by encompassing decision-making skills and stress management.

Wachinger G  further states that supportive strategies, including emotional and material

strategies, act as an important help to deal with the post-disaster experiences. Emotional supportive

strategies comprised programs focusing on stress reduction, transforming and modifying the

maladaptive behaviours to the socially acceptable behaviours and informing people how to respond

to the emotional stressful situations. Material supportive strategies include the policies introduced for

maintaining harmony in the environment by providing the victims with proper distribution of

resources, proper access to resources and by assisting the affected people in creating social and

economic well-being and by highlighting the problems of the marginalized people and providing

them with the maximum care and support.

Resilience promotes physical, social and emotional well-being and acts as an important protective

factor . Resilience is also considered as a key aspect of positive psychology which helps in the

upliftment of oneself and enhances the quality of life to a great extent. Resilience can be understood

in terms of the individual context (building resilience in people) or in terms of the community

context (building resilient communities).

Folke et al.  study the inclusion of human and social factors which were important components of

resilience. Resilience is not just the ability to deal effectively with negative situations and instantly

recover from the negative impacts. But also, mental preparedness for future situations and

vulnerabilities.

Rose and Liao  mention two components of resilience. The first component was inherent

resilience where the damaged structure was substituted by building a stronger force of labour which

reduced the economic impact of the disaster. The second component was adaptive resilience where

there was a quick implementation of the economic policies, such as providing the necessary goods

and services to the affected population.

A study conducted by Kar  found that the problems related to hyperactivity were reduced after

the application of the appropriate intervention techniques. The children were largely benefitted from

the intervention and started appreciating positive emotions and its importance in maintaining

positive well-being. They were also more likely to refrain themselves from any kind of addiction. The

intervention was successful because of the pre-existing resilient children and the vulnerable children

required special care. Coping strategies also act as a protective factor in determining one's quality of

life after the disaster. The effective coping mechanisms help an individual to cope better with the

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

7/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

stressors. Preparing oneself for the stressors, accepting the stressors and finding the means to

overcome the sufferings is one of the best coping mechanisms. He further states that the survivors

who valued their individuality in terms of the awareness of the social and spiritual self were reported

to be more effective in coping with the aversive stimuli. The study also explored the importance of

awakening of the spiritual self in order to deal with the external and internal negativity.

Understanding the significance of one's own existence and fixing and nurturing of one's own self

helped the survivors to enhance the quality of their well-being.

Solomon and Laufer  in a study have identified a group of factors leading to effective coping

mechanisms in an individual. The group of factors, including a commitment to the ideologies of the

group, maintaining group cohesiveness through inclusion of the religious beliefs, have protected the

communities and individuals which were highly exposed to terrorist attacks. Property damage,

physical injuries and loss of loved ones, were the causal factors for behavioural and emotional

problems in the victims. The support from the communities and personal resiliency have helped them

to cope better.

Nan Zhang et al.  identified two levels of psychological intervention. The first was the basic level

or the routine psychological interventions that consist of psychological education, support and

relaxation techniques, are applied as a part of psychological intervention process in many situations.

Psychological education means learning of the virtues and personal capabilities that an individual

possesses. Support means the immediate support group that was available in the surrounding. The

support was direct or indirect, but the effect depended on the genuine support that the affected

communities or individuals received from their loved ones, neighbours, friends and other people

willing to counsel them, help them and empathize with their emotional aspect. The relaxation

techniques focused on the physiological relaxation of the body which helped in the normal regulation

of the body. Along with the psychological domain, the physiological domain required a lot of balance

and the relaxation techniques have helped the individuals to balance and regulate their body in a

proper way.

The second was the high-level psychological intervention which worked with emotions,

characteristics, economic change and other factors. This intervention technique was based on specific

individuals and specific communities. Different techniques were responsible for different individuals

and communities, depending on the personal resilience and social system resilience. The high-level

intervention was effective because of the application of individual-based techniques. The strategies

were effective and have helped the victims to overcome the trauma as soon as possible. The victims

were able to regain hope, had an emotional control on themselves and inculcated environment

adaptability, which improved their mental health.

Discussion and Conclusion

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

8/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

Emotional instability, stress reactions, anxiety, trauma and other psychological symptoms are

observed commonly after the disaster and other traumatic experiences. These psychological effects

have a massive impact on the concerned individual and also on communities. Resilience plays a vital

role and acts as an effective measure. Most affected individuals recover with time, with the help of

effective post-intervention techniques and their individual strengths. In some cases, recovery is

incomplete leading to a number of persistent psychotic symptoms which are often severe in nature.

PTSD is the most frequently encountered along with anxiety, depression and other behavioural and

psychological abnormalities. PTSD often comorbid with a variety of psychiatric symptoms like

unnecessary fear, hopelessness, worthlessness and helplessness and other physical symptoms which

leads to the deterioration of their mental health.

The provided information suggests that there are a number of factors affecting different groups of

population in their adaptability. Awareness about the importance of post-intervention techniques and

their applicability in the affected population has helped the victims in their recovery. The supportive

methods included the individual strengths and capabilities and community-based approaches

consisting of the institutions like education, health, local and national governments.

So to conclude, Disaster, not only disrupts the quality of life but also creates a significant burden of

mental health conditions on an individual and the community. Effective interventions should be given

pre, peri and post-disaster period to improve the adverse mental health effects of the disaster. The

psycho-social education and clinical interventions are expected to provide better outcomes because of

the integration of various effective measures. Rehabilitations plans should be made by keeping in

mind the cultural context of the community and the needs of the affected population. So that

community is empowered in a holistic way to cope with future disasters.

Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.

References

1. Kreimer A. Social and economic impacts of natural disasters. International Geology

Review. 2001 May 1;43(5):401–5. [Google Scholar

]

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

9/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

2. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Living with risk: A global review of disaster

reduction initiatives. United Nations Publications. 2004 [Google Scholar

]

3. Martin ML. Child participation in disaster risk reduction: The case of flood-affected

children in Bangladesh. Third World Quarterly. 2010 Dec 1;31(8):1357–75. doi:

10.1080/01436597.2010.541086. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

4. Math SB, Girimaji SC, Benegal V, Uday Kumar GS, Hamza A, Nagaraja D. Tsunami:
Psychosocial aspects of Andaman and Nicobar islands. Assessments and intervention in the

early phase. International Review of Psychiatry. 2006 Jan 1;18(3):233–9. doi:

10.1080/09540260600656001. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

5. Quarantelli EL. Evacuation Behavior and Problems: Findings and Implications from the
Research Literature. OHIO STATE UNIV COLUMBUS DISASTER RESEARCH CENTER. 1980

Jul [Google Scholar

]

6. Quarantelli EL. Disaster crisis management: A summary of research findings. Journal of
management studies. 1988 Jul;25(4):373–85. [Google Scholar

]

7. Mental health in emergencies [Internet] [cited 2019 Jun 20]. Available from:

https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-in-emergencies

 .

8. Peek L. Children and disasters: Understanding vulnerability, developing capacities, and
promoting resilience—An introduction. Children Youth and Environments. 2008 Jan

1;18(1):1–29. [Google Scholar

]

9. Hackbarth M, Pavkov T, Wetchler J, Flannery M. Natural disasters: an assessment of family

resiliency following Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy. 2012
Apr;38(2):340–51. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-0606.2011.00227.x. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google

Scholar

]

10. Freedy JR, Shaw DL, Jarrell MP, Masters CR. Towards an understanding of the

psychological impact of natural disasters: An application of the conservation resources stress
model. Journal of Traumatic Stress. 1992 Jul;5(3):441–54. [Google Scholar

]

11. Tapsell SM, Penning-Rowsell EC, Tunstall SM, Wilson TL. Vulnerability to flooding:

health and social dimensions. Philosophical transactions of the royal society of London.
Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences. 2002 May 24;360(1796):1511–

25. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2002.1013. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

12. Tunstall S, Tapsell S, Green C, Floyd P, George C. The health effects of flooding: social

research results from England and Wales. Journal of water and health. 2006 Sep
] [PubMed] [Google Scholar
1;4(3):365–80. doi: 10.2166/wh.2006.031. [DOI

]

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

10/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

13. Jenkins R, Meltzer H. The Mental Health Impacts of Disasters. Government Office of

Science, UK. 2012 [Google Scholar

]

14. Kar N. Indian research on disaster and mental health. Indian journal of psychiatry. 2010

Jan;52(Suppl 1):S286. doi: 10.4103/0019-5545.69254. [DOI

] [PMC free article]

[PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

15. Murthy RS. Mental health of survivors of 1984 Bhopal disaster: A continuing challenge.
]
Industrial psychiatry journal. 2014 Jul;23(2):86. doi: 10.4103/0972-6748.151668. [DOI

[PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

16. Cullinan P, Acquilla SD, Dhara VR. Long term morbidity in survivors of the 1984 Bhopal

gas leak. The National medical journal of India. 1996;9(1):5–10. [PubMed] [Google
Scholar

]

17. Wachinger G, Renn O, Bianchizza C, Coates T, De Marchi B, Domènech L, Jakobson I,

Kuhlicke C, Lemkow L, Pellizzoni L. Risk perception and natural hazards. WP3-Report of the

CapHaz-Net Projekt. 2010. Sep, URL: http://www. caphaz-net. org. Synergien zwischen
Naturschutz und Klimaschutz–Wasser/Gewässer (-Management)

18. Wachinger G, Renn O, Begg C, Kuhlicke C. The risk perception paradox—implications for

governance and communication of natural hazards. Risk analysis. 2013 Jun;33(6):1049–65.

doi: 10.1111/j.1539-6924.2012.01942.x. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

19. Aiena BJ, Baczwaski BJ, Schulenberg SE, Buchanan EM. Measuring resilience with the

RS–14: A tale of two samples. Journal of Personality Assessment. 2015 May 4;97(3):291–

300. doi: 10.1080/00223891.2014.951445. [DOI

] [PubMed] [Google Scholar

]

20. Folke C. Social-ecological resilience and behavioural responses. Beijer International

Institute of Ecological Economics. 2002 [Google Scholar

]

21. Rose A, Liao SY. Modeling regional economic resilience to disasters: A computable

general equilibrium analysis of water service disruptions. Journal of Regional Science. 2005
Feb;45(1):75–112. [Google Scholar

]

22. Laufer A, Solomon Z. Posttraumatic symptoms and posttraumatic growth among Israeli

youth exposed to terror incidents. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology. 2006 Apr

1;25(4):429–47. [Google Scholar

]

23. Nan Z, Hong H, Jihong X, Yuntao L. Research on post-disaster psychological intervention

and reconstruction model. InIEEE Conference Anthology. 2013 Jan 1;:1–4. IEEE. [Google

Scholar

]

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

11/12

2/8/26, 12:36 PM

Disaster and its impact on mental health: A narrative review - PMC

Articles from Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care are provided here courtesy of Wolters

Kluwer -- Medknow Publications

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6857396/

12/12

