Topographic Map 
Symbols

Reading Topographic Maps

Interpreting the colored lines, areas, and other symbols is the ﬁ rst 
step in using topographic maps. Features are shown as points, lines, 
or areas, depending on their size and extent. For example, individual 
houses may be shown as small black squares. For larger buildings, 
the actual shapes are mapped. In densely built-up areas, most indi-
vidual buildings are omitted and an area tint is shown. On some 
maps, post ofﬁ ces, churches, city halls, and other landmark buildings 
are shown within the tinted area.

The ﬁ rst features usually noticed on a topographic map are the 
area features, such as vegetation (green), water (blue), and densely 
built-up areas (gray or red).

Many features are shown by lines that may be straight, curved, 
solid, dashed, dotted, or in any combination. The colors of the lines 
usually indicate similar classes of information: topographic contours 
(brown); lakes, streams, irrigation ditches, and other hydrographic 
features (blue); land grids and important roads (red); and other roads 
and trails, railroads, boundaries, and other cultural features (black). 
At one time, purple was used as a revision color to show all feature 
changes. Currently, purple is not used in our revision program, but 
purple features are still present on many existing maps.

Various point symbols are used to depict features such as buildings, 
campgrounds, springs, water tanks, mines, survey control points, 
and wells. Names of places and features are shown in a color cor-
responding to the type of feature. Many features are identiﬁ ed by 
labels, such as “Substation” or “Golf Course.” 

Topographic contours are shown in brown by lines of different 
widths. Each contour is a line of equal elevation; therefore, contours 
never cross. They show the general shape of the terrain. To help 
the user determine elevations, index contours are wider. Elevation 
values are printed in several places along these lines. The narrower 
intermediate and supplementary contours found between the index 
contours help to show more details of the land surface shape. Con-
tours that are very close together represent steep slopes. Widely 
spaced contours or an absence of contours means that the ground 
slope is relatively level. The elevation difference between adjacent 
contour lines, called the contour interval, is selected to best show 
the general shape of the terrain. A map of a relatively ﬂ at area may 
have a contour interval of 10 feet or less. Maps in mountainous 
areas may have contour intervals of 100 feet or more. The contour 
interval is printed in the margin of each U.S. Geological Survey 
(USGS) map.

Bathymetric contours are shown in blue or black, depending on 
their location. They show the shape and slope of the ocean bottom 
surface. The bathymetric contour interval may vary on each map and 
is explained in the map margin.

What is a Topographic Map?

A map is a representation of the Earth, 
or part of it. The distinctive character-
istic of a topographic map is that the 
shape of the Earth’s surface is shown 
by contour lines. Contours are imag-
inary lines that join points of equal 
elevation on the surface of the land 
above or below a reference surface, 
such as mean sea level. Contours 
make it possible to measure the 
height of mountains, depths of 
the ocean bottom, and steep-
ness of slopes. 

A topographic map shows 
more than contours. The 
map includes symbols 
that represent such fea-
tures as streets, buildings, 
streams, and vegetation. 
These symbols are con-
stantly reﬁ ned to better 
relate to the features they 
represent, improve the 
appearance or readability of 
the map, or reduce production 
cost. 

Consequently, within the same 
series, maps may have slightly dif-
ferent symbols for the same feature. 
Examples of symbols that have 
changed include built-up areas, roads, 
intermittent drainage, and some letter-
ing styles. On one type of large-scale 
topographic map, called provisional, 
some symbols and lettering are hand- 
drawn.

U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Geological Survey

 
 
 
 
 
