CHAPTER 14

FIRST AID AND HEALTH

If you do something once, people call it an accident. If you do it twice,
they call it coincidence. But do it a third time and you’ve just proven a
natural law.

—Rear Admiral Grace Murray Hopper

In this chapter, you will learn some guidelines on
giving first aid in an emergency. You won’t be an expert
or even qualify to administer first aid. You will learn
why first aid is important and the results of properly
administered first aid. You will also learn the measures
you should take for the treatment of shock, bleeding,
burns, and fractures; methods of resuscitation; and
methods of moving injured persons.

Personal hygiene is also important, not only to you,
the individual, but to the entire ship’s company. In this
chapter, you will receive pointers for maintaining
cleanliness of the body, clothing, and bedding. You will
also learn the effects of sexually transmitted diseases.

FIRST AID—ITS PURPOSE,
LIMITATIONS, AND GENERAL RULES

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recognize the purpose, general rules, and

limitations of first aid.

First aid is the emergency care you give to sick or
injured persons until medical care is available. In
addition to knowing what to do for a victim, it’s just as
important to know what not to do.

Your knowledge of first-aid measures and their
proper application may mean the difference between
life and death, between rapid recovery and long
hospitalization, or between temporary disability and
permanent injury.

PURPOSE AND LIMITATIONS

The objectives of first aid are to save life, prevent
further injury, and limit infection. However, first aid
isn’t a substitute for proper medical treatment. Keep in
mind the objectives of first aid. Everyone in the Navy
must know when and how to apply first-aid measures

and must be prepared to give assistance to persons
injured in battle, collision, fire, and other mishaps.

In administering first aid, you have three primary

tasks:

1. Maintain breathing

2. Stop bleeding/maintain circulation

3. Prevent or treat for shock

The first step, of course, is to determine the victim’s
injuries. When you treat a victim, first consideration
usually must be given to the most serious injury. In
general, the order of treatment is to restore breathing,
stop bleeding, and treat for shock.

Work quickly, but don’t rush around frantically.
Don’t waste time looking for ready-made materials. Do
the best you can with whatever is at hand. Send for
medical help as soon as possible.

GENERAL FIRST-AID RULES

Although each case involving injury or sickness
presents its own special problems, some general rules
apply to practically all situations. Before you go on to
learn first-aid treatment for specific types of injuries,
learn with the following basic rules:

1. Keep the victim lying down; head level with the
body, until you have found out what kind of injury has
occurred and how serious it is. However, if the victim
shows one of the following difficulties, follow the rule
given for that specific problem:

a. Vomiting or bleeding about the mouth and
semiconsciousness: If the victim is in danger of
sucking in blood, vomited matter, or water,
place the victim on his or her side or back with
the head turned to one side and lower than the
feet.

14-1

b. Shortness of breath: If the victim has a chest
injury or breathing difficulties, place the victim
in a sitting or semisitting position.

c. Shock: If the victim is in shock, place the
victim on his or her back with the head slightly
lower than the feet. (Shock is explained later in
this chapter.)

2. Move the victim no more than is absolutely
necessary. To determine the extent of the victim’s
injuries, carefully rip or cut the clothing along the
seams. Removal of clothing in the normal way may
make injuries worse, especially if fracture injuries are
involved. Shoes may also be cut off to avoid causing
pain or increasing an injury. When the clothing is
removed, make sure the victim does not become
chilled.

3. Keep the victim reassured and as comfortable as
possible. If possible, don’t let the victim see his or her
injuries. The victim can endure pain and discomfort
better if he or she is confident of your abilities.

4. Don’t touch open wounds or burns with fingers
or other objects except when sterile compresses or
bandages aren’t available and it’s absolutely necessary
to stop severe bleeding.

5. Don’t try to give an unconscious person any
solid or liquid substance by mouth. The person may
vomit and get some of the material into the lungs
when he or she breathes, causing choking and
possibly death.

6. If a bone is broken or you suspect that one is
broken, don’t move the victim until you have
immobilized the injured part. That may prove lifesaving
in cases of severe bone fractures or spinal cord injuries,
for the jagged bone may sever nerves and blood vessels,
damage tissues, and increase shock. Of course, threat of
fire, necessity to abandon ship, or other similar
situations may require that you move the victim. But
always keep in mind the principle that moving the
victim could do further damage; always weigh the risk
of moving the victim against other factors.

7. When transporting an injured person, always
see that the litter is carried feet forward no matter what
the injuries are. Carrying the litter this way lets the rear

Student Notes:

bearer observe the victim for any respiratory
obstruction or stoppage of breathing.

8. Keep the injured person comfortably
warm—warm enough to maintain normal body
temperature.

Very serious and mutilating injuries may require
heroic first-aid measures on your part. However, the
greater the number of injuries, the more judgment and
self-control you must exhibit to prevent yourself and
well-intentioned bystanders from trying to do too much.

REVIEW 1 QUESTIONS

Q1. Describe the primary purpose of first aid.

Q2. List the primary tasks when administering first

aid.

a.

b.

c.

Q3. Describe the general first-aid rule for the

following conditions:

a. Shock

b. Broken bones

c. Transporting injured personnel

ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures used to administer

artificial ventilation.

14-2

A person who has stopped breathing may not be
dead but is in immediate critical danger. Life depends on
oxygen that is breathed into the lungs and then carried
by the blood to every body cell. Since body cells can’t
store oxygen and the blood can hold only a limited
amount (and only for a short time), death will result
from a continued lack of oxygen.

The heart may continue to beat and the blood may
still be circulated to the body cells for some time after
breathing has stopped. For a short time, blood will
contain a small supply of oxygen; therefore, the body
cells won’t die immediately. For a very few minutes,
there’s a chance that the person’s life may be saved.
A person who’s stopped breathing but who is still alive
is in a state of respiratory failure. The first-aid treatment
for respiratory failure is artificial ventilation.

Artificial ventilation provides air exchange until
natural breathing is reestablished. Artificial ventilation
should be given only when natural breathing has
stopped. Never give artificial ventilation to any
person who is still breathing.

Don’t assume breathing has stopped if a person is
unconscious or if a person has been rescued from the
water, from poisonous gas, or from contact with an
electrical wire. Remember, never give artificial
ventilation to a person who is breathing naturally. If
the victim doesn’t begin spontaneous breathing (breaths
by himself/herself) after using the head or jaw tilt
techniques (discussed later) to open the airway, give
artificial ventilation immediately. If a blocked airway
prevents ventilation, one of the “thrust” methods
(discussed later) to clear the airway must be performed,
followed by another attempt at artificial ventilation.

MOUTH TO MOUTH

To perform mouth-to-mouth ventilation, take the

following steps:

1. Clear the victim’s mouth of obstructions (false

teeth and foreign matter).

2. Place the heel of one hand on the victim’s
forehead, and use the other hand placed under
the chin to tilt back the head to open the airway.

Student Notes:

3. Using the thumb and index finger, pinch the

nostrils shut.

4. Take a deep breath, cover the victim’s mouth

with your own, and blow.

5. Then remove your mouth from the victim to

allow him or her to exhale.

Observe the victim’s chest for movement. If the
victim hasn’t started to breathe normally, start artificial
ventilation with four quick ventilations in succession,
letting the lungs inflate only partially. If the victim still
doesn’t respond, then you must fully inflate the victim’s
lungs at the rate of 12 to 15 ventilations per minute, or
one breath every 5 seconds.

MOUTH TO NOSE

Mouth-to-nose ventilation is effective when the
victim has extensive facial or dental injuries or is very
young. Mouth-to-nose ventilation creates an effective
air seal.

To administer this mouth-to-nose ventilation—

1. Place the heel of one hand on the victim’s
forehead and use the other hand to lift the jaw.

2. After sealing the victim’s lips, take a deep
breath, place your lips over the victim’s nose,
and blow.

Observe the chest for movement and place your ear
next to the victim’s nose to listen for or feel air
exchange. Again, you must continue your efforts at the
rate of 12 to 15 ventilations per minute, or one breath
every 5 seconds, until the victim can breathe without
assistance.

Sometimes during artificial ventilation air enters
the stomach instead of the lungs. This condition is
called gastric distention. It can be relieved by moderate
pressure exerted with a flat hand between the navel and
the rib cage. Before applying pressure, turn the victim’s
head to the side to prevent choking on the stomach
contents that are often brought up during the process.

BACK PRESSURE/ARM LIFT

The back pressure/arm lift method is an alternate
technique used when other methods are not possible. To

14-3

The compression is performed on the outside of the
chest, and the lungs are ventilated either by
mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-nose techniques. To be
effective, CPR must be started within 4 minutes of
the onset of cardiac arrest. The victim should be lying
on a firm surface.

CAUTION

A rescuer who has not been properly trained
should not attempt CPR. (To learn CPR, you
should take an approved course from a
qualified CPR instructor.) Improperly done,
CPR can cause serious damage. Therefore, it is
never practiced on a healthy individual for
training purposes; a training aid is used instead.

ONE-RESCUER TECHNIQUE

In an unwitnessed cardiac arrest, don’t assume that
an arrest has occurred solely because the victim is lying
on the floor and appears to be unconscious. Before
beginning CPR, you should—

1. Try to arouse the victim (shake the victim’s
shoulders and shout to try to obtain a response).

2. Lie the unconscious victim on his/her back.

3. Kneel at the shoulders and establish an open
airway, using the procedures outlined
previously in artificial ventilations.

4. Check for breathing by looking, listening, and

feeling.

a. Look to see if the chest is rising and falling.

b. Listen for air coming from the mouth.

c. Check close to the victim’s mouth and feel

for air coming out.

5. If the victim isn’t breathing, seal the nose, take a
deep breath, and blow four quick breaths into
the victim without allowing time for the lungs to
deflate fully.

6. Quickly remove your mouth and allow the

victim to exhale by himself/herself.

7. Check the carotid pulse as shown in -1.
If no pulse is present, start CPR immediately.

perform the back pressure/arm lift method, do the
following steps:

1. Place the victim on the stomach, face to one
side, neck hyper extend, with hands under the
head.

2. Quickly clear the mouth of any foreign matter.

3. Kneel at the victim’s head and place your hands
on the victim’s back so that the heels of the
hands lie just below a line between the armpits,
with thumbs touching and fingers extending
downward and outward.

4. Rock forward, keeping your arms straight, and
exert pressure almost directly downward on the
victim’s back, forcing air out of the lungs.

5. Then rock backward, releasing the pressure and

grasping the arms just above the elbows.

6. Continue to rock backward, pulling the arms
upward and inward (toward the head) until
resistance and tension in the victim’s shoulders
are noted. That expands the chest, causing active
intake of air (inspiration).

7. Rock forward and release the victim’s arms.
That causes passive exiting of air (expiration).

Repeat the cycle of press, release, lift, and release
10 to 12 times a minute until the victim can breathe
naturally.

CARDIAC ARREST AND
CARDIOPULMONARY
RESUSCITATION

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—
• Re ca ll

t he p ro cedures
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).

t o a dminister

Cardiac arrest is the complete stoppage of heart
function. If the victim is to live, action must be taken
immediately to restore heart function. The immediate
administration of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
by a rescuer using correct procedures greatly increases
the chances of a victim’s survival. CPR consists of
external heart compression and artificial ventilation.

Student Notes:

14-4

fracture of this area can damage the liver,
causing hemorrhage (heavy bleeding)
and death. When you place the heels of
your hands on the victim’s chest, stay
above the tip of the sternum.

3. Place the heel of one hand directly on the
sternum, and the heel of the other on top of the
first. -3, view A, shows this technique.
Interlock your fingers, and keep them off the
victim’s chest!

4. Lean or rock forward with elbows locked, and
apply vertical pressure to depress the sternum
(adult) 1 ½ to 2 inches (-3, view B).

5. Then release the pressure, keeping the hands in

place.

6. Administer 60 to 80 compressions per minute.

You won’t get as tired if you use the proper
technique, and you will be more effective. Ineffective
compression occurs when the elbows are not locked, the
rescuer is not directly over the sternum, or the hands are
improperly placed on the sternum.

-3.—Position for cardiac compression.

-1.—Feeling for the carotid pulse.

To start external cardiac compression—

1. Place the victim on his/her back, establish an
open airway, and kneel at right angles to the
victim’s body.

2. Then locate the victim’s sternum (breastbone)

by—

a. Baring the chest and locating the sternum by
drawing an imaginary line from one nipple
to the other to identify the proper area of the
sternum, which is darkened in -2.

b. Locating the lower tip of the sternum with
the index and middle fingers, placing the
heels of your hands above your fingers in the
darkened area.

-2.—Locating the sternum.

NOTE

There is a small piece of cartilage at the
lower end of the sternum (-2). A

Student Notes:

14-5

c. Continue compression—ventilation rate of
15 to 2 until victim is responsive or you are
relieved by medical personnel.

TWO-RESCUER TECHNIQUE

If two people trained in CPR are on the scene, one
performs compressions while the other performs
artificial ventilation. The compression-ventilation ratio
for two-person CPR is 5 compressions to 1 ventilation
(5 to 1). One rescuer is positioned at the chest area and
the other beside the victim’s head. The rescuers should
be on opposite sides of the victim.

To avoid confusion, one rescuer is designated the
leader. The leader makes the preliminary checks of the
victim’s vital signs and performs the initial four
ventilations. The second rescuer will perform the
compressions.

When CPR is started, the compressions should be
given in a constant, methodical rhythm. The rescuer
giving the compressions counts them out loud. As the
fifth compression is released, the other rescuer
ventilates the victim. Do not stop the compressions
while ventilation is being given.

AIRWAY BLOCKAGE

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures used to clear an airway

passage.

Obstruction in the upper airway (throat) is often
caused by attempting to chew food and talk at the same
time. One of the most reliable indications of an airway
obstruction is the inability of the victim to speak. Other
indicators are the victim’s grasping or pointing at his or
her throat, exaggerated breathing efforts, and the skin
turning a bluish color. Your first action upon
encountering a victim with this problem is to clear the
mouth of any food particles, foreign objects, or loose
dentures. If that is not effective, you should use one of
the following procedures:

When one rescuer performs CPR, as shown in
-4, the ratio of compressions to ventilations is
15 compressions to 2 ventilations (or 15 to 2). This ratio
must continue for four full cycles. Then check for pulse
and breathing. If there are still no signs of recovery,
continue CPR until the victim can breathe unassisted or
you are relieved by medical personnel.

Before reviewing the next technique, let’s go over
the steps to take in an unwitnessed cardiac arrest
involving one rescuer.

1. Determine whether the victim is conscious.

2. Check the vital signs.

3. Ventilate four times. (You may have to remove

an airway obstruction at this time.)

4. Again check the vital signs; if none—

a Begin compression-ventilation rate of 15 to

2 for four complete cycles;

b. Check pulse, breathing, pupils; if no change,

-4.—One-rescuer CPR technique.

Student Notes:

14-6

PROCEDURE

STEPS

Standing abdominal thrust

1.

Stand behind the victim and wrap your arms around the victim’s waist (-5).

Reclining abdominal thrust

Standing chest thrust

2.

3.

1.

2.

1.

2.

3.

Grasp your wrist and place the thumb side of your fist against the victim’s abdomen,
above the navel and just below the rib cage (-6).

Give four quick upward thrusts to the victim. The obstruction should pop out like a
champagne cork. If unsuccessful, repeat until the obstruction is dislodged.

Position yourself for the thrust by either straddling the victim at the hips, straddling
one leg, or kneeling at the victim’s hips.

Place your hands one on top of the other in the area between the lower end of the
sternum and the navel, and give four quick upward thrusts into the abdomen, as
shown in -7.

Bring your arms under the arms of the victim and encircle the lower chest, as shown
in -8.

Grasp your wrist, keeping the thumb side close to the victim’s chest. (Keep your fist
on the middle, not the lower part, of the sternum.)

Press the chest with a sharp, backward thrust.

Reclining chest thrust

1.

Kneel at either side of the victim, place hands in same position as used for CPR.

2.

Deliver thrusts slowly and downward on the sternum (-9).

-6.—Correct hand positioning.

-5.—Position for standing abdominal thrust.

-7.—Position for reclining abdominal thrust.

14-7

Q4. What is cardiac arrest?

Q5. To be effective, CPR must be started within how
many minutes of the onset of cardiac arrest?

-8.—Position for standing chest thrust.

Q6. When you use the one-rescuer technique of CPR,
what is the ratio of compressions to ventilations?

-9.—Position for reclining chest thrust.

REVIEW 2 QUESTIONS

Q1. What is the first-aid treatment for respiratory

failure?

Q2. W he n shou ld art ifi ci al ve nt il ation be

administered?

Q3. List the three types of artificial ventilation.

a.

b.

c.

Student Notes:

Q7. When you use the two-rescuer technique of CPR,
what is the ratio of compressions to ventilations?

Q8. List the symptoms of airway blockage.

a.

b.

c.

Q9. List the four methods you can use to clear a

person’s airway.

a.

b.

c.

d.

14-8

HEMORRHAGE AND METHODS OF
CONTROLLING BLEEDING

same effect. The important thing to know is that all
bleeding must be controlled as quickly as possible.

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures used to control external

bleeding.

Blood is circulated throughout the body by three

different kinds of blood vessels.

1. Arteries, which are large vessels that carry the

blood away from the heart

2. Veins, which are large vessels that carry the

blood back to the heart

3. Capillaries, which form a connecting network
of smaller vessels between the arteries and the
veins

Hemorrhage (escape of blood) occurs whenever
there is a break in the wall of one or more blood vessels.
In most small cuts, only capillaries are injured. Deeper
wounds result in injury to veins or arteries. Bleeding
severe enough to endanger life seldom occurs except
when arteries or veins are cut.

The average adult body contains about 5 quarts
(4.75 liters) of blood. One pint of blood can usually be
lost without harmful effect—in fact, that’s the amount
usually given by blood donors. However, the loss of 2
pints (0.95 liter) will usually cause shock, and shock
becomes greater as the amount of blood loss increases.
(Shock will be discussed later in this chapter.) If half the
blood in the body is lost, death almost always results.

Capillary blood is usually brick red in color. If
capillaries are cut, the blood oozes out slowly. Blood
from the veins is dark red. If a vein is cut, the blood
escapes in a steady, even flow. If an artery near the
surface is cut, the blood will gush out in spurts that are
synchronized with the heartbeats; but if the cut artery is
deeply buried, the bleeding will appear to be a steady
stream. Arterial blood is usually bright red in color.

In actual practice, you might find it difficult to
decide whether bleeding was from a vein or an artery;
but the distinction is not usually important. A person
can bleed to death quickly from a cut artery; prolonged
bleeding from any large cut can, of course, have the

Student Notes:

The only way to stop serious bleeding is by the
application of pressure. In practically all cases, bleeding
can be stopped if pressure is applied directly to the
wound. If direct pressure doesn’t stop the bleeding,
pressure should be applied at the appropriate pressure
point. In those very rare cases where bleeding is so
severe that it cannot be controlled by either of these
methods, pressure can be applied by a tight constricting
band. The actual procedures you should use to stop
bleeding are shown in chart on pages 14-10 and 14-11.

CAUTION

Never put on a constricting band unless the
hemorrhage is so severe that it cannot be
controlled in any other way. Once a constricting
band has been applied, it should be released
only by medical personnel.

BATTLE DRESSINGS

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures used to apply battle

dressings.

A battle dressing is a combination compress and
bandage, in which a sterile gauze pad is fastened to a
gauze, muslin, or adhesive bandage. Most Navy
first-aid kits contain both large and small battle
dressings. Battle dressings are also supplied at battle
dressing stations located throughout the ship. Any part
of a dressing that is to come into direct contact with a
wound should be absolutely sterile. The dressing you
find in Navy first-aid kits have been sterilized. Never
touch a battle dressing with your fingers, clothing, or
any other unsterile object.

When applying a battle dressing, make sure the
dressing is the proper size so that it covers the wound
completely. Some wounds, such as protruding
abdominal wounds, require the dressing to be
moistened in sterile water. Battle dressing should be
applied so it doesn’t allow the dressing to move or slip

14-9

PROCEDURE

STEPS

Direct pressure

In most cases, bleeding can be stopped by the application of pressure directly on the

wound.

Pressure points

Constricting band

• Place a dressing (sterile or clean, if possible) over the wound and firmly fasten it in

position with a bandage.

• If bleeding doesn’t stop, firmly secure another dressing over the first, or apply direct

pressure with your hand to the dressing (-10).

• In cases of severe hemorrhage, don’t worry too much about the danger of infection.
The basic problem is to stop the flow of blood. If no material is available, simply place
your hand firmly on the wound. Remember, direct pressure is the first method to use
when you are trying to control hemorrhage.

Bleeding from a cut artery or vein may often be controlled by applying pressure to the
appropriate pressure point. A pressure point is a place where the main artery to the injured part
lies near the skin surface and over a bone. Pressure at such a point is applied with the fingers
(digital pressure) or with the hand; no first-aid materials are required. The object of the
pressure is to compress the artery against the bone, shutting off the flow of blood from the
heart to the wound. There are 10 principal points (-11) on each side of the body where
hand or finger pressure can be used to stop hemorrhage. You should memorize these pressure
points so that you will know immediately which point to use for hemorrhage from a particular
part of the body. The correct pressure point you should use is the one that is—

1. Nearest the wound.

2. Between the wound and the main part of the body, or between the wound and the heart.

Applying finger pressure is very tiring, and it can seldom be maintained for more than 15
minutes. Pressure points are recommended for use while direct pressure is being applied to a
serious wound. While pressure is being applied at the appropriate pressure point, an assistant
can bandage the wound (or wounds). If available, a battle dressing should be used. After
opening the dressing, be careful not to contaminate it. Place the compress portion over the
wound, then bind it tightly in place with the attached straps (-12). If bleeding continues
to be severe even after direct pressure and pressure points have been used, you may have to
apply a constricting band.

A constricting band is a band used to cut off the supply of blood to an injured limb. It
can’t be used to control bleeding from the head, neck, or body because its use in these
locations would result in greater injury or death. Only use a constricting band when
hemorrhage can’t be controlled by other means.

A constricting band consists of a pad, a band, and a device for tightening the band so that
the blood vessels will be compressed. There are several different kinds of ready-made
constricting bands. A variety of materials can be used to improvise constricting bands. Any
round, smooth pressure object may be used for the pad (such as a compress, a roller bandage, a
stone, or a rifle shell), and any long, flat material may be used as the band. Remember, the
band must be flat! Belts, stockings, flat strips of rubber, or neckerchiefs can be used; but rope,
wire, string, or very narrow pieces of cloth shouldn’t be used because they will cut into the
flesh. A short stick may be used to twist the band, tightening the constricting band.

14-10

PROCEDURE

Constricting band
(Continued)

STEPS

A constricting band must always be applied above the wound; that is, toward the body, and

it must be applied as close to the wound as practicable.

The best object to be used for the pad is either a pad, compress, or similar pressure object.
The pad goes under the band. Place it directly over the artery, or it will actually decrease the
pressure on the artery and allow greater flow of blood. If a constricting band placed over a
pressure object doesn’t stop the bleeding, the pressure object is probably in the wrong place. If
that occurs, shift the object around until the constricting band, when tightened, controls the
bleeding. If no suitable pressure object is available, use the constricting band without it.

To apply an emergency constricting band (-13) made from something like a

neckerchief—

1. Wrap the material (which is a minimum of 2 inches wide) at least twice around the limb

and tie an overhand knot.

2. Place a short stick on the overhand knot and tie a square knot over it. Then twist the
stick rapidly to tighten the constricting band. The stick may be tied in place with another strip
of material.

To be effective, a constricting band must be tight enough to stop the blood flowing to the
limb. If the pressure from the constricting band is less than the arterial pressure, arterial
bleeding will continue. Also, insufficient constricting band pressure may actually increase the
amount of bleeding from the veins. So be sure to draw the constricting band tight enough to
stop the bleeding. However, don’t make it any tighter than necessary.

After you have brought the bleeding under control with the constricting band, apply a

sterile compress or dressing to the wound, and fasten it in position with a bandage.

Some points to remember about using a constricting band are as follows:
• Don’t use a constricting band unless you can’t control the bleeding by any other means.
• Don’t use a constricting band for bleeding from the head, face, neck, or body. Use one

only on the limbs.

• Always apply a constricting band above the wound and as close to the wound as

possible.

• Be sure you draw the constricting band tight enough to stop the bleeding, but don’t

make it any tighter than necessary.

• Don’t loosen a constricting band after it has been applied.

Don’t cover a constricting band with a dressing. If it’s necessary to cover the injured
person in some way, make sure all other people concerned with the case know about the
constricting band. Using a crayon, skin pencil, or blood, make a large T on the victim’s
forehead or on a medical tag attached to the wrist, and note the time the constricting band was
applied.

14-11

-11.—Pressure points for control of bleeding.

14-12

-10.—Direct pressure.

off the wounded area. Once a battle dressing has
been applied to a wound, it shouldn’t be removed except
by medical personnel. Each ship in the Navy holds
periodic training on first aid. There are always new and
updated techniques on how to administer first-aid
procedures, including how to apply battle dressings.
Pay particular attention to these training sessions and
learn as must as you possibly can.

REVIEW 3 QUESTIONS

Q1. List the three types of blood vessels the body

uses to circulate blood.

a.

b.

c.

Q2. Under what condition is hemorrhage (bleeding)

severe enough to endanger life?

-12.—Battle dressing.

Q3. A loss of how many pints of blood will usually

cause shock?

Q4. What color is blood carried by (a) capillaries, (b)

veins, and (c) arteries?

a.

b.

c.

Q5. What is the only way to stop serious bleeding?

-13.—Applying a constricting band.

Student Notes:

14-13

Q6. What is a constricting band?

Q7. When a battle dressing is applied, what person

should release or remove it?

Q8. What is a battle dressing?

Q9. How should you apply a battle dressing?

SHOCK

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recognize the symptoms, prevention, and

treatment of shock.

If you’ve ever hit your finger with a hammer and
felt—in addition to the pain—weak, dizzy, and
nauseous, then you have experienced a mild form of
shock. In this case,
the symptoms appeared
immediately after the injury, but they may not show up
for several hours.

Shock is a condition in which blood circulation is
seriously disturbed. Crushed or fractured bones, burns,
prolonged bleeding, and asphyxia all cause shock.
Shock may be slight or it may be severe enough to cause
death. Because all traumatic injuries result in some form
of shock, you should learn its symptoms and know how
to treat the victim.

HOW TO RECOGNIZE SHOCK

A person who is going into shock may show quite a
few signs or symptoms, some of which are indicated in
-14, and are discussed in the following
paragraphs. Remember, that signs of shock don’t
always appear at the time of the injury; and, in many

Student Notes:

-14.—Symptoms of shock.

very serious cases, symptoms may not appear until
hours later.

The symptoms of a person suffering from shock are
caused, directly or indirectly, by the disturbance of the
circulation of the blood. Symptoms of shock include the
following:

• The pulse is weak and rapid.
• Breathing is likely to be shallow, rapid, and
irregular, because the poor circulation of the blood
affects the breathing center in the brain.

• The temperature near the surface of the body is
lowered because of the poor blood flow; so the face,
arms, and legs feel cold to the touch.

• Sweating is likely to be very noticeable.
• A person in shock is usually very pale, but, in
some cases, the skin may have a bluish or reddish color.
In the case of victims with dark skin, you may have to
rely primarily on the color of the mucous membranes on
the inside of the mouth or under the eyelid or under the
nail bed. A person in or going into shock has a bluish
color to these membranes instead of a healthy pink.

14-14

• The pupils of the eyes are usually dilated

(enlarged).

• A conscious person in shock may complain of
thirst and have a feeling of weakness, faintness, or
dizziness. The victim may feel nauseous, restless,
frightened, and/or anxious. As shock deepens, these
signs gradually disappear and the victim becomes less
and less responsive to what is going on. Even pain may
not arouse the shock victim. Finally, the victim may
become unconscious.

You will not likely see all the symptoms of shock in
any one case. Some of them may appear only in late
stages of shock when the disturbance of the blood flow
has become so great that the person’s life is in serious
danger. Sometimes the signs of shock may be disguised
by other signs of the injury. You must know what
symptoms indicate the presence of shock, but don’t ever
wait for symptoms to develop before beginning the
treatment for shock. Remember, every seriously
injured person is likely to develop serious shock!

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF
SHOCK

You should begin treatment for shock as soon as
possible. Prompt treatment may prevent shock or, if it
has already developed, prevent its reaching a critical
point. Keep the victim lying down and warm. If
conscious, the victim should be encouraged and assured
that expert medical help will arrive soon.

Keep an injured person warm enough for
comfort, but do not let the victim become
overheated.

The best position to use to prevent or to treat shock
is one that encourages the flow of blood to the brain. If
possible, place the injured person on his or her back on a
bed, a cot, or a stretcher. Raise the lower end of the
support about 12 inches so that the feet are higher than
the head (-15). If you can’t do that and it’s
possible, raise the feet and legs enough to help the blood
flow to the brain. Sometimes it’s possible to take
advantage of a natural slope of ground and place the
victim so that the head is lower than the feet.

Student Notes:

-15.—Position for the treatment of shock.

Of course in every case, you’ll have to consider
what type of injury is present before you can decide on
the best position. Here are some examples:

• If a person has a chest wound, he/she may have
so much trouble breathing that you will have to
raise the head slightly.

• If the face is flushed, rather than pale, or if you
have any reason to suspect a head injury, don’t
raise the feet. Instead, you should keep the head
level with or slightly higher than the feet.

• If the person has broken bones, you will have to
judge what position would be best both for the
fractures and for shock. A fractured spine must
be immobilized before the victim is moved at all,
if further injuries are to be avoided.

If you have any doubts about the correct position to
use, have the victim lie flat on his/her back. The basic
position for treating shock is one in which the head is
lower than the feet. Do the best you can under the
particular circumstances to get the injured person into
this position. In any case, never let a seriously injured
person sit, stand, or walk around.

Administer liquids sparingly, and not at all if
medical attention will be available within a short time. If
necessary, small amounts of warm water, tea, or coffee
may be given to a victim who is conscious. Persons
having serious burns are an exception. Burn victims
require large amounts of fluids. Water, tea, fruit juices,
and sugar water may be given freely to a victim who is
conscious, able to swallow, and has no internal injuries.
Slightly salted water is also beneficial. Never give
alcohol to a person in shock.

An injured person may or may not be in pain. The
amount of pain felt depends in part on the person’s
physical condition and the type of injury. Extreme pain,
if not relieved, can increase the degree of shock. Make

14-15

the victim as comfortable as possible. Fractures should
be immobilized and supported. Immobilization greatly
reduces, and sometimes eliminates, pain.

Q3. True or false. Keep an injured person warm
enough for comfort, but do not let the victim
become overheated.

An injured person’s body heat must be conserved.
Therefore, heat is important in the treatment of shock.
Exposure to cold, with resulting loss of body heat, can
cause shock to develop or to become worse. You will
have to judge the amount of covering to use by
considering the weather and the general circumstances
of the accident. Often a light covering will be enough to
keep the casualty comfortable. Wet clothing should be
removed and dry covering provided, even on a hot day.
Use blankets or any dry material to conserve body heat.
Artificial means of warming (hot water bottles, heated
bricks, heated sand) should not ordinarily be used.
Artificial heat may cause loss of body fluids (by
sweating), and it brings the blood closer to the surface,
defeating the body’s own efforts to supply blood to the
vital organs and to the brain. Also, the warming agent
may burn the victim.

REVIEW 4 QUESTIONS

Q1. What is shock?

Q2. List the symptoms of shock.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

Student Notes:

Q4. If you suspect a person to be in shock, what is the

best position for that person?

SUICIDE

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recognize suicidal tendencies and possible

treatment.

Suicide among young adults is a serious and
growing problem. Among Navy perso nnel,
approximately 10% of the Navy’s nonhostile
active-duty deaths are caused by suicide. Among the
leading causes of nonhostile deaths in the Navy, suicide
ranks third behind accidents and heat-related causes.
The most frequent suicide victims in the Navy are
enlisted males between the ages of 17 and 24 and in
paygrades E-1 to E-6.

Why suicide? There isn’t a simple answer as to why
people choose to kill themselves. Usually, some
emotional trauma is so great they “just want to stop the
pain.” They feel helpless, hopeless, and worthless. They
feel that suicide is the only way out.

CAUSES OF SUICIDE

Most suicides are caused by a combination of
events that lead a person to believe that suicide is the
only way out. The following are some common causes
of suicide:

• The breakup of a close relationship with a loved
one or difficulties in interpersonal relationships

• The death of a loved one, spouse, child, parent,

sibling, friend, or even a pet

• The loss of social or financial status of the family

14-16

• The compounding and disorienting effects of

drugs and/or alcohol

DEPRESSION

Depression is often associated with suicide. In 75%
to 80% of all suicides, depression is a contributing
factor. Sadness and an occasional “case of the blues” are
normal emotions. However, depression isn’t a normal
emotional state. Depression is a deep sadness that’s
present almost daily for at least 2 weeks.

WHAT TO DO

If you believe someone you know is suicidal,

remember the following:

• Take all threats seriously
• Answer cries for help
• Confront the problem
• Tell the person you care
• Listen actively
• Get professional help
• Don’t leave the person alone

REVIEW 5 QUESTIONS

Q1. In the Navy, who is the most frequent suicide

victim?

Q2. List the common causes of suicide.

a.

b.

c.

d.

Q3. What condition is often associated with suicide?

Student Notes:

Q4. List some actions you should take if someone

you know might be suicidal.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

BURNS

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recognize the symptoms of, classification of,

and first-aid treatment for burns.

The seriousness of a burn depends on two
factors—the extent of the burned area and the depth of
the burn. Shock can be expected from burns involving
15% or more of the body. Burns involving 20%
endanger life. Without adequate treatment, burns of
over 30% are usually fatal. The depth of the injury
determines whether it is a first-, second-, or third-degree
burn.

First-degree burns. First-degree burns are mildest.
Symptoms are slight pain, redness, tenderness, and
increased temperature of the affected area.

Second-degree burns. Second-degree burns are
more serious. The inner skin may be damaged, resulting
in blistering, severe pain, some dehydration, and
possible shock.

14-17

Third-degree burns. Third-degree burns are worst
of all. The skin is destroyed, and possibly also the tissue
and muscle beneath it. The skin may be charred, or it
may be white and lifeless (from scalds). After the initial
injury, pain may be less severe because of destroyed
nerve ends. There may be chilling of the body. Some
form of shock will result.

Probably the most important aspect is the extent of
the burned area. A first-degree burn covering a large
area could be more serious than a small third-degree
burn. A sunburn, for example, ranging from mild to
serious, is easily obtained, particularly if you aren’t
accustomed to the exposure. If you fall asleep while
sunbathing, possible second- or even third-degree burns
might occur and could be fatal.

The most effective immediate treatment of burns

and of pain is as follows:

1. If the burn area covers less than 20% of the
body, immerse the burned area in cold water, or apply
cold compresses if immersion is impracticable. Cold
water not only minimizes pain but also reduces the
burning effect in the deeper layers of the skin. Gently
pat dry the area with lint-free cloth or gauze.

2. If the burn area covers more than 20% of the
body, apply sterile, dry bandages. Aspirin is also
effective for the relief of pain. Continue treatment until
no pain is felt when the burned area is exposed to the air.

Burn victims require large amounts of water, which
should be slightly salted. Because of the nature of the
injury, most burns are sterile. Therefore, the best
treatment for uninfected burns is merely to protect the
area by covering it with the cleanest (preferably sterile)
dressing available.

Some actions that should not be taken when dealing

with burns are as follows:

• Never apply ointments to a burn or use

petrolatum gauze.

• Don’t attempt to break blisters or to remove
shreds of tissue or adhered particles of charred
clothing.

Student Notes:

• Never apply a greasy substance (butter, lard, or
Vaseline™), antiseptic preparations, or
ointments. These may cause further
complications and interfere with later treatment
by medical personnel.

REVIEW 6 QUESTIONS

Q1. Define the following types of burns:

a. First-degree burn

b. Second-degree burn

c. Third-degree burn

Q2. If a burn covers less than 20% of a victim’s body,
you should immerse the burned area in cold
water or apply cold compresses. Why should you
take these actions?

Q3. If a burn covers more than 20% of a victim’s

body, what actions should you take?

Q4. When treating burns, you should NEVER take

which of the following actions?

a. Apply petrolatum gauze

b. Break blisters

c. Apply butter, lard, or Vaseline™

d. Each of the above

HEAT-RELATED PROBLEMS

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recognize the symptoms of and first-aid

treatment for heat-related illnesses.

14-18

Look at -16. Here, you see a comparison of
the symptoms of heatstroke and heat exhaustion. These
are dangers you face when working or exposed to
conditions that might cause heatstroke or heat
exhaustion.

HEATSTROKE

Sunstroke is more accurately called heatstroke
since it is not necessary for a person to be exposed to the
sun for this condition to develop. It is a less common but
far more serious condition than heat exhaustion, since
heatstroke has a 20% mortality rate. The more
important feature of heatstroke is the extremely high
body temperature (105(cid:1)F [41(cid:1)C] or higher) that
accompanies it. In heatstroke, the victim has a
breakdown of the sweating mechanism and is unable to
eliminate excessive body heat built up while exercising.
If the body temperature rises too high, the brain,
kidneys, and liver may be permanently damaged.

Signs and symptoms of heatstroke. Sometimes
the victim may have preliminary symptoms such as
headache, nausea, dizziness, or weakness. Breathing
will be deep and rapid at first, later shallow and almost
absent. Usually the victim will be flushed, very dry, and

very hot. The pupils will be constricted (pinpoint) and
the pulse fast and strong.

Treatment of heatstroke. When you provide first
aid for heatstroke, remember that this is a true
life-and-death emergency. The longer the victim
remains overheated, the higher the chances of
irreversible body damage or even death. First-aid
treatment for heatstroke is designed to reduce body heat
and includes the following:

• Reduce body heat immediately by dousing the
body with cold water, or applying wet, cold
towels to the whole body.

• Move the victim to the coolest possible place and

remove as much clothing as possible.

• Maintain an open airway.

• Place the victim on his or her back, with the head

and shoulders slightly raised.

• If cold packs are available, place them under the
arms, around the neck, at the ankles, and on the
groin.

-16.—Symptoms of heatstroke and heat exhaustion.

Student Notes:

14-19

• Expose the victim to a fan or air-conditioner

since drafts will promote cooling.

• Immersing the victim in a cold water bath is also

effective.

• Give the victim (if conscious) cool water to
drink. Do not give any hot drinks or stimulants.

• Get the victim to a medical facility as soon as
possible. Cooling measures must be continued
while the victim is being transported.

HEAT EXHAUSTION

Heat exhaustion (heat prostration or heat collapse)
is the most common condition caused by working or
exercising in hot spaces. Heat exhaustion produces a
serious disruption of blood flow to the brain, heart, and
lungs. This disruption of blood flow causes the victim to
experience weakness, dizziness, headache, loss of
appetite, and nausea.

Signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion. Signs
and symptoms of heat exhaustion are similar to those of
shock: for example—

• The victim will appear ashen gray; the skin cold,

moist, and clammy.

• The pupils of the eyes may be dilated (enlarged).

• The vital signs (blood pressure, temperature,
pulse, and respiration) usually are normal;
however, the victim may have a weak pulse
together with rapid and shallow breathing.

• Body temperature may be below normal.

Treatment of heat exhaustion. To treat heat
exhaustion victims, you should treat them as if they
were in shock.

• Loosen the clothing; apply cool, wet cloths.

• Move the victim to either a cool or an

air-conditioned area, and fan the victim.

• Do not allow the person to become chilled.

Student Notes:

• If the victim is conscious, administer a solution
of 1 teaspoon of salt dissolved in a quart of cool
water.

• If the victim vomits, don’t give any more fluids.

• Transport the victim to a medical facility as soon

as possible.

REVIEW 7 QUESTIONS

Q1. List the three most important signs of heatstroke.

a.

b.

c.

Q2. List the three most important signs of heat

exhaustion.

a.

b.

c.

Q3. What is the most important action when treating
someone who is showing signs of heatstroke or
heat exhaustion?

Q4. True or false. In case of heatstroke/heat
exhaustion, you should transport the victim to a
medical facility as soon as possible.

FRACTURES, SPRAINS, AND STRAINS

Learning Objectives: When you finish this chapter,
you will be able to—

14-20

• Recognize the classification of, symptoms of,

and first-aid treatment for fractures.

• Recall the first-aid treatment for strains and

sprains.

Simply put, a fracture is a broken bone. The severity
of the injury depends on the part of the body affected,
the type of fracture, and the amount of tissue damaged.

FRACTURES

In this section, you will learn about fractures—how
they’re classified and the first-aid you would give the
victim. Additional information is given on how to
transport victims.

Classification

Fractures may be classified in several ways.
However, they are generally classified as are either
closed or open. A closed fracture is one in which the
skin remains intact. An open fracture is one in which the
bone protrudes from the skin. These fractures are shown
in -17.

Symptoms

You can’t always tell that a fracture has occurred.
However, if the victim has been involved in some form
of violence, you may suspect that one or more bones
have been broken. The victim may even have heard the
bone snap. Some symptoms of a fracture are as follows:

• Pain and tenderness
• Inability to use the part
• Creaking or cracking
• Motion at points other than joints
• Swelling
• Deformity
• Discoloration of skin

Treatment

If you are required to give first aid to a person who
has suffered a fracture, you should follow these general
rules:

Student Notes:

14-21

-17.—Types of fractures.

• If there is any possibility that a fracture has been

sustained, treat the injury as a fracture.

• Get medical aid at the first possible opportunity.

All fractures require medical treatment.

• Don’t move the victim until splints have been
applied to the injured parts, unless the victim’s
life is in danger.
• Treat for shock.
• Don’t attempt to locate a fracture by grating the

ends of the bone together.

• Don’t attempt to set a broken bone.
• When a long bone in the arm or leg is fractured,
the limb should be carefully straightened so that
splints can be applied. Pulling gently with your
hands in the long axis of the limb is permissible,
and it may be all that is necessary to get the limb
back into position.

• Apply splints. Emergency splinting may be
placed over clothing if the victim will be seen
very soon by a medical officer or if the victim
will be transported for a short distance.
Otherwise, it’s best to remove just enough
clothing so you can apply well-padded splints

directly to the injured part. If you decide to
remove clothing over the injured part, cut the
clothing or rip it along the seams. In any case, be
careful! Rough handling of the victim may turn a
closed fracture into an open fracture. That could
increase the severity of shock and cause
extensive damage to the blood vessels, nerves,
muscles, and other tissues around the broken
bone.

If the fracture is open, you must treat the wound
before you can deal with the fracture. Bleeding from the
wound may be serious. Most bleeding can be stopped by
direct pressure on the wound or by finger pressure at the
appropriate point. If, after your best efforts, these
methods are not successful, use a constricting band;
then treat the fracture.

Use of Splints

An essential part of the first-aid treatment is
immobilizing the injured part with splints so that the
sharp ends of broken bones won’t move around and
cause further damage to nerves, blood vessels, or vital
organs. Splints are also used to immobilize severely
injured joints or muscles and to prevent the enlargement
of extensive wounds. Before you can use a splint, you
need to have a general understanding of the use of
splints.

In an emergency, almost any firm object or material
can be used as a splint. Such things as umbrellas, canes,
swords, rifles, tent pegs, laths, sticks, oars, paddles,
spars, wire, leather, boards, pillows, heavy clothing,
corrugated cardboard, and folded newspapers can be
used as splints. A fractured leg may sometimes be
splinted by fastening it securely to the uninjured leg.

Splints, whether ready-made or improvised, must

meet the following requirements:

• Be light in weight, but still be strong and fairly

rigid.

• Be long enough to reach the joints above and

below the fracture.

• Be wide enough so the bandages used to hold
them in place won’t pinch the injured part.

Student Notes:

• Be well padded on the sides that touch the body.
If they’re not properly padded, they won’t fit well
and won’t adequately immobilize the injured
part.

• To improvise the padding for a splint, use articles
of clothing, bandages, cotton, blankets, or any
other soft material.

• If the victim is wearing heavy clothes, apply the
splint on the outside, allowing the clothing to
serve as at least part of the required padding.

Although splints should be applied snugly, never
apply them tight enough to interfere with the circulation
of the blood. When applying splints to an arm or a leg,
try to leave the fingers or toes exposed. If the tips of the
fingers or toes become blue or cold, you will know that
the splints or bandages are too tight. You should
examine a splinted part approximately every half-hour,
and loosen the fastenings if circulation appears to be cut
off. Remember that any injured part is likely to swell,
and splints or bandages that are all right when applied
may be too tight later.

-18 shows a method of immobilizing the
leg of a person with a broken kneecap. To secure the
limb to the splint, belts, neckerchiefs, rope, or any
suitable material may be used. If possible, tie the limb at
two places above and two places below the break.

Leave the treatment of other types of fractures, such
as jaw, ribs, and spine, to medical personnel. Never try
to move a person who might have a fractured spine
or neck. Moving such a person could cause permanent
paralysis. Don’t attempt to reset bones.

SPRAINS AND STRAINS

A person with a sprain or a strain might have some
of the same symptoms as a person who has a fracture.
The information contained in this section will help you

-18.—Splinting.

14-22

know what to do if a there is a possibility a shipmate has
sustained a strain or a sprain.

Sprains

A sprain is an injury to the ligaments and soft tissues
that support a joint. A sprain is caused by the violent
wrenching or twisting of the joint beyond its normal
limits of movement. Any joint may be sprained;
however, sprains of the ankle, wrist, knee, and finger are
most common.

SYMPTOMS.—Symptoms of sprains include
pain or pressure at the joint, pain upon movement,
swelling and tenderness, possible loss of movement,
and discoloration.

TREATMENT.—Treat all sprains as fractures
until ruled out by X-rays. To treat a sprain, you should
take the following actions:

• Application of cold packs for the first 24 to 48

hours.

• Elevation and rest of the affected area.
• Application of a snug, smooth, figure-eight
bandage to control swelling and to immobilize
(keep from moving) the affected area. (NOTE:
Check bandaged areas regularly for swelling that
might cause circulation problems and loosen
bandages if necessary.)

• After the swelling stops (24 to 48 hours), apply
moist heat for short periods (15 to 30 minutes).

CAUTION

Do not apply heat until 24 hours after the last
cold pack.

After applying first aid, make sure the victim has a
follow-up examination by a medical officer. This exam
includes X-rays to rule out fractures.

Strains

A strain is an injury caused by the forcible over
stretching or tearing of a muscle or tendon. A strain may
be caused by lifting excessively heavy loads, sudden or
violent movements, or any other action that pulls the
muscles beyond their normal limits.

SYMPTOMS.—Symptoms of strains include
pain, lameness or stiffness, moderate swelling at the
place of the injury, discoloration caused by blood
escaping from injured blood vessels into the tissues,
possible loss of power, and a distinct gap felt at the site
of the injury.

TREATMENT.—To treat a strain, you should take

the following actions:

• Elevate the affected area.
• Apply cold packs for 24 to 48 hours.
• After the swelling stops, apply mild heat to

increase circulation and aid in healing.

NOTE

Do not apply heat until 24 hours after the
last cold pack.

The victim should be evacuated to a medical facility
where X-rays can be taken to rule out the possibility of a
fracture.

Student Notes:

14-23

REVIEW 8 QUESTIONS

Q1. Label the following fractures.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

Q4. List the types of fractures that should be treated

by medical personnel.

a.

b.

c.

Q5. What is the reason that you should never move a
person who might have a fractured spine or
neck?

Q6. List the symptoms a victim might have with a

sprained or strained leg.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

Q2. List the symptoms of a fractured leg or arm.

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

g.

Q3. Briefly describe how to give first aid to someone

with a fractured leg or arm.

a.

Student Notes:

14-24

f.

g.

Q7. Describe the first aid that should be given to a
victim suspected of having a sprained or strained
leg.

RESCUE PROCEDURES

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures to rescue a person.

There are many ways to move victims. The method
used depends on several factors—where the victim is
located and where the victim is to be taken, assistance
available, equipment on hand, and so forth. If available,
litters or stretchers should be used.

In you don’t have any help, there are several
methods you can use to move a victim alone. One
method is simply to pick up and carry the victim in your
arms, but it can be quite a task if the victim weighs more
than you. If a blanket is handy, the victim can be placed
upon it and dragged. Two other means are the fireman’s
carry (-19) and the tied-hands crawl (-20).

FIREMAN’S CARRY

One of the easiest ways to carry an unconscious
person is by the fireman’s lift, also called the fireman’s
carry (-19).

Student Notes:

-19.—Fireman’s carry.

14-25

1. Place the victim face down, as shown in -19, view A. Kneel on one knee at the head,
facing the victim. Pass your hands under the
armpits.

2. Raise the victim, as shown in -19, view

B. Take a better hold across the back.

3. Raise the victim to a standing position and stick
your right leg between the victim’s legs, as
shown in -19, view C. Grasp the
victim’s right wrist in your left hand and swing
the arm around the back of your neck and down
your left shoulder.

4. Stoop quickly and pull the victim across your
shoulders and, at the same time, put your right
arm between the victim’s legs, as shown in
-19, view D.

5. Grasp the victim’s right wrist with your right
hand and straighten up, as shown in -19, view E.

The procedure for lowering the victim to the deck is

shown in -19, views F and G.

TIED-HANDS CRAWL

The tied-hands crawl shown in -20 may be
used to drag an unconscious person for a short distance;
it is particularly useful when you must crawl underneath
a low structure.

Don’t touch the victim’s body, the wire, or any

other object that may be conducting electricity.

Some procedures you might use to rescue a person

who’s received an electric shock are as follows:

• Look for the switch first of all, and if you find it,
turn off the current immediately. Don’t waste too
much time hunting for the switch; however,
every second is important.

• If you cannot find the switch, you should try to
remove the wire from the victim with a dry
broom handle, branch, pole, oar, board, or
similar nonconducting object (-21).
• It may be possible to use dry rope or dry clothing

to pull the wire away from the victim.

• You can also break the contact by cutting the wire
with a wooden-handled axe, but that is extremely
dangerous because the cut ends of the wire are
likely to curl and lash back at you before you
have time to get out of the way.

When you are trying to break an electrical
contact, always stand on some nonconducting
material, such as a dry board, newspaper, or
clothing.

Administer artificial ventilation immediately after
freeing the person from the wire if the electric shock
caused breathing to stop. Check the victim’s pulse,
since electric shock may also cause the heart to stop. If

-20.—Tied-hands crawl.

RESCUE FROM ELECTRICAL CONTACT

Rescuing a person who has received an electric
shock is likely to be difficult and dangerous. Use
extreme caution or the rescuer may also be electrocuted.

Student Notes:

14-26

-21.—Pushing a victim away from a power line.

you do not feel a pulse, immediately administer CPR.
Get the victim to a medical facility as soon as possible.

carry the stretcher so that you won’t run any risk of
dropping the victim.

TRANSPORTATION PROCEDURES

Learning Objective: When you finish this chapter, you
will be able to—

• Recall the procedures to transport a person.

So far, you’ve learned about the emergency
methods used to get an injured person out of danger and
into a position where first aid can be administered. As
you have learned, these emergency rescue procedures
often involve substantial risk to the victim and should be
used only when clearly necessary.

Once you’ve rescued the victim from the immediate
danger, slow down! Handle and transport the victim
with care, being careful about the injuries that have been
sustained. In the excitement and confusion that almost
always accompany a mishap, you are likely to feel
rushed, as though you must do everything rapidly. This
is a reasonable way to feel. Speed is essential in treating
many injuries and in getting the casualty to a medical
officer or hospital. However, it’s not reasonable to let
yourself feel so hurried that you handle the victim
roughly or carelessly or transport the victim in a way
that will make the injuries worse.

GENERAL PRECAUTIONS

The basic precautions to observe when transporting

an injured person are summarized as follows:

• Give necessary first aid before attempting to
transport the victim if possible. Be sure all injuries have
been located. Treat serious breathing problems,
bleeding, and shock in that order. Immobilize all
fractures, sprains, and dislocations. Do whatever you
can to reduce the victim’s pain and to make the victim as
comfortable as possible under the circumstances.

• Use a regular stretcher if one is available. If you
must use an improvised stretcher, be sure it is strong
enough. Also, be sure that you have enough personnel to

Student Notes:

• Whenever possible, bring the stretcher to the

victim instead of carrying the victim to the stretcher.

• Fasten the victim to the stretcher to prevent
slipping, sliding, or falling off. Tie the victim’s feet
together, unless the injuries make it impracticable.

• Use blankets, garments, or other material to pad
the stretcher and to protect the victim from exposure.
• As a general rule, an injured person should be
lying down, face up, while being moved. However, in
some instances the type or location of the injury will
necessitate the use of another position. If the victim has
a chest wound, raising the head and shoulders may give
greater comfort, and ease any breathing difficulties the
victim may have. A person who has a broken bone
should be moved very carefully so that the injury will
not be made worse. If the victim has received a severe
injury to the head, the victim should be kept lying on the
side or on the back with the head turned to one side to
prevent choking on saliva, blood, or vomit while being
transported. In all cases, it is important to place the
victim in a position that prevents further injuries.

• The stretcher should be carried in such a way that
the victim will be moved feet first, so that the rear
stretcher bearer can continually watch the victim for
signs of breathing difficulty.

• If you must use a motor vehicle to transport a
seriously injured person, the best means is an
ambulance. If no ambulance is available, a truck or
station wagon makes a fairly good substitute. If it is
necessary to use a passenger car to transport a seriously
injured person, the victim should be put in a place that
requires the least amount of bending, twisting, or
turning.

• Don’t turn the victim over to anyone without
giving a complete account of the situation. Be sure the
person taking over knows what caused the injury and
what first-aid treatment has been given. If a constricting
band has been applied, make sure that is known to the
person who is taking charge of the victim.

14-27

-22.—Stokes stretcher.

STOKES STRETCHER

The Navy service litter most commonly used for
transporting sick or injured persons is called the Stokes
stretcher (-22). The Stokes stretcher is a wire
basket supported by iron or aluminum rods. It’s
adaptable to a variety of uses, since the victim can be
held securely in place, even if the stretcher is tipped or
turned. The Stokes stretcher is particularly valuable for
transferring injured persons to and from boats. It is also
used for direct ship-to-ship transfer of injured persons.

NEIL ROBERTSON STRETCHER

The Neil Robertson stretcher is designed for
removing an injured person from engine-room spaces,
holds, and other compartments where access hatches
are too small to permit the use of regular stretchers.

The Neil Robertson stretcher is made of semirigid
canvas. When firmly wrapped around the victim
mummy-fashion, it gives sufficient support so the
victim may be lifted vertically (-23). To keep the
injured person from swaying against bulkheads and
hatchways while being lifted, tie a guideline to the
victim’s ankles.

Stretchers of this type can be made on board ship
and kept in appropriate places ready for use. If a Neil
Robertson stretcher is not available when needed, a
piece of heavy canvas, wrapped firmly around the
victim, will serve somewhat the same purpose.

EMERGENCY RESCUE LINES

An emergency rescue line can be made from any
strong fiber line. These lines should be used only in

Student Notes:

-23.—Neil Robertson stretcher.

extreme emergencies when an injured person must be
moved and no other means is available.

-24 shows an emergency rescue line that
could be used to hoist a person from a void or small
compartment. Notice that a running bowline is passed
around the body, just below the hips, and a half hitch just
under the arms. Again, a guideline is tied to the victim’s
ankles.

14-28

PERSONAL HYGIENE

Learning Objectives: When you finish this chapter,
you will be able to—

• Identify the purpose for personal hygiene.
• Recognize the consequences of not following a

personal hygiene program.

Because of the close living quarters in the Navy,
particularly aboard ship, personal hygiene is very
important. Developing good personal hygiene habits is
essential for the good health of the individual and for the
protection of the entire crew. For the same reasons,
sanitary conditions aboard ship must be maintained at
all times. Clean spaces are a necessity. Dirt breeds
disease. When spaces are kept clean and orderly, the
general well-being of the crew improves and morale
increases. No one wants to live or work in a filthy
environment. In the Navy and at home, everyone should
make it a habit to keep living and working spaces as
clean as possible. Maintaining a clean, healthy
environment reduces the chances of illness.

Negligence in reporting to the medical officer any
matter that affects one’s health is inexcusable. It can
lead to a more serious illness. Don’t ignore minor
injuries. An untreated cut or scratch can lead to
infection, loss of a limb, and even death. If you can’t
report for treatment right away, wash the injury with
soap and clean water. A large wound should not be
washed; cover it with a clean dressing until it can be
attended to by medical personnel.

Some practices you can take to be healthy include

-24.—Emergency rescue line.

REVIEW 9 QUESTIONS

Q1. What is one of the easiest ways to carry an

unconscious person?

Q2. Describe the precautions you should take when
rescuing a person who has received an electric
shock.

Q3. How should you carry a stretcher?

the following:

Q4. What type of stretcher is used to transport an
injured person from engine-room spaces?

Q5. When are emergency rescue lines used?

Showering. Shower and change underwear daily.
After showering, dry thoroughly, particularly your feet
to prevent fungus development. Wear shower shoes
when taking a shower to avoid contracting athlete’s
foot.

Shoes and socks. Wear properly fitted shoes and
socks. The inner dimensions of the shoe should be about
1/4 inch longer and wider than the foot. Improperly
fitted socks and socks with holes can cause blisters.
Change your socks daily.

Student Notes:

14-29

Toenails and feet. Cut your nails straight across to
prevent ingrown toenails. If corns or other foot ailments
develop, have them treated at once.

Fingernails. Keep fingernails trimmed and clean.

Hair. Keep your hair neatly trimmed and wash it

Dental cleansing devices, oral irrigators, and
commercial mouthwashes are aids to oral hygiene.
They may be used in addition to—but not in place
of—tooth brushing and flossing. If these devices are
electrically powered, they must be safety checked by
electrical safety personnel before use.

often.

Bunk linen. Change it at least weekly.

NOTE

Exercise and sleep. Daily exercise improves
bodily functions, increasing muscle tone and physical
endurance. Even aboard small ships, it’s possible to
exercise in some manner. Get as much sleep as watch
and work conditions permit.

Diet. Navy food is good and wholesome. It provides
a well-balanced diet. Don’t be a finicky eater, even
though you don’t like some foods. Learn to eat a variety
of foods; try to avoid putting more on your tray than you
care to eat.

ORAL HYGIENE

Many dental disorders begin with the buildup of
bacterial plaque that remains undisturbed around the
teeth. The purpose of personal oral hygiene is to remove
this plaque buildup. Plaque can be removed by proper
tooth brushing and flossing techniques.

There are three common dental conditions that are

caused by poor dental hygiene:

1. Tooth decay

2. Reddening of the gums

3. Gum and bone disease

Any of these can cause the loss of a tooth; but with
proper oral hygiene, these conditions can be controlled
or prevented.

Tooth decay can be reduced by cutting down on
sweets and by brushing properly. For most people,
cavities and gum and bone disease occur primarily
between the teeth. No toothbrush can effectively
cleanse these areas or the areas behind the last tooth in
each arch. You must use dental floss to clean such
hard-to-reach areas. You should floss at least once a day,
either just before or just after brushing. Unwaxed dental
floss should be used in most cases.

Student Notes:

Oral irrigation may be harmful for individuals
with cardiovascular problems.

In addition to all of these procedures, you should
also have a dental checkup every 6 months or at least
once a year. Your dental technician or dentist can show
you the proper way to brush and floss your teeth.

SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are illness
caused by organisms that are transmitted through sexual
intercourse or by forms of other intimate body contact
with an infected person. The disease germs that cause
syphilis and gonorrhea are very fragile and can live for
only short periods of time outside the body. Venereal
disease is not spread from inanimate objects such as
toilet seats, drinking glasses, bed linens, or clothes.

Syphilis and gonorrhea are the two most common
sexually transmitted diseases in the United States.
Syphilis has had the worst reputation, but it is gonorrhea
that is out of control.

Syphilis

Syphilis can attack any tissue or organ of the body
and is especially damaging to the brain, spinal cord,
blood vessels, and heart.

A painless sore, called a chancre, is the first sign of
syphilis. The sore usually appears on or around the sex
organs about 9 to 90 days after contact with an infected
person. The chancre will heal within a few weeks, even
without treatment.

Other signs of syphilis that may develop either
before or after the chancre goes away are a rash that may
cover any part of the body; white, glistening spots in the
mouth; and fever, sore throat, and headaches. The rash

14-30

and other signs may not appear or may be so slight as to
be unnoticed.

After these signs disappear, the germs may stay
hidden for 10 to 20 years. If untreated, the disease
causes mental illness, blindness, heart disease, or even
death.

Syphilis is not inherited, but a pregnant woman with
the disease can give it to her unborn child. These babies
are born with congenital syphilis. A baby with
congenital syphilis may be born dead or deformed.
Congenital syphilis can be prevented if it is detected and
treated in time.

The signs of syphilis may resemble many other
diseases, or the signs may be slight and be unnoticed.
The disease can be detected by a blood test for syphilis.

Gonorrhea

If you have gonorrhea and don’t get treatment, you
may become sterile. Gonorrhea can damage the sperm
ducts in males and the fallopian tubes in females. In men
and women, gonorrhea may result in crippling arthritis,
meningitis, or heart disease.

The signs of gonorrhea in males usually appear 3 to
5 days after sexual contact with an infected partner.
Most men have a pus discharge from the sex organ and a
painful, burning sensation during urination. Women
rarely have painful symptoms until gonorrhea has
seriously damaged their reproductive system. There
may be some vaginal discharge or burning during
urination, but women will usually have no symptoms
and will not know that they have gonorrhea until a
sexual partner has been infected.

If you have syphilis or gonorrhea, a cure is as near as
your medical department. But early treatment is
important. These diseases can be cured even in people
who have had the disease for a long time, but the damage
to the reproductive organs may be irreversible.

NOTE

Self-treatment or pills from a friend are
extremely dangerous.

Student Notes:

Genital Herpes Infection

Genital herpes is an increasingly common viral
infection that produces recurrent, painful genital sores
similar to cold sores that occur around the mouth. At
this time, there is no known cure for genital herpes; the
infected person may have recurrences of lesions
throughout life. Individuals should avoid sexual
intercourse when the sores are present because the
herpes virus is infectious in this phase of the disease.

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

The Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) was first reported in the United States in mid
1981. AIDS is a serious illness and a public health
problem. It’s the number one priority of the U.S. Public
Health Service.

AIDS is a serious condition characterized by a
defect in natural immunity (defense) against disease.
People who have AIDS are vulnerable to serious
illnesses that aren’t a threat to anyone whose immune
system is functioning normally. These illnesses are
referred to as “opportunistic” infections or diseases.

Investigators have discovered the virus that causes
AIDS. The virus is called either human immune virus
(HIV); human T-lymphotropic virus, type III (HTLV-3);
lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV); or
AIDS-related virus (ARV). Most people infected with
the AIDS virus have no symptoms and feel well. Some
develop symptoms that may include tiredness; fever;
loss of appetite and weight; diarrhea; night sweats; and
swollen glands (lymph nodes), usually in the neck,
armpits, or groin. Anyone with these symptoms should
see a doctor if the symptoms continue for more than 2
weeks

AIDS is spread by sexual contact, needle sharing, or
less commonly, through blood or its components. The
risk of getting AIDS is increased by having multiple
sexual partners, either homosexual or heterosexual, and
sharing needles with people who use illicit drugs. The
occurrence of the AIDS in hemophilia patients and
persons receiving transfusions provides evidence of
transmission through blood. It may be transmitted from
infected mother to infant before, during, or shortly after
birth.

14-31

Prevention

Using a condom during sex offers some protection.
Birth control pills offer no protection against STDs. If
you had the disease once and have been successfully
treated, that does not grant you immunity against
contracting an STD again.

If you have been diagnosed as having an STD and
are receiving treatment at the present time, don’t
attempt to hide the name(s) of your sexual partners. The
chances are that one of them infected you or have been
infected by you. They deserve the benefit of treatment
too. The health department will contact the persons
named and treat them. These steps, which are done
confidentially, can help in stopping an outbreak of a
sexually transmitted disease.

REVIEW 10 QUESTION

Q1. List some of the reasons why personal hygiene is

important.

a.

b.

c.

d.

Q2. List the three most common dental conditions

caused by poor dental hygiene.

a.

b.

c.

Q3. What methods should you use to avoid dental

problems?

a.

b.

c.

Student Notes:

Q4. What are the two most common sexually

transmitted diseases?

a.

b.

Q5. How is the Acquired Immune Deficiency

Syndrome (AIDS) spread?

a.

b.

c.

SUMMARY

In this chapter, you have learned some of the basic
steps and procedures required when administering first
aid. You may never have the need to use these
procedures, but if the situation should arise, by
following the procedures outlined, and with additional
training, you may be in a position to render what could
be life-saving assistance. You also learned the
recommended ways of transporting injured personnel
so they can receive proper medical attention.

Personal hygiene is an important part of living
closely together. A shipmate not overly concerned with
keeping himself or herself clean and squared away
could affect your physical well-being, but could also
affect the morale of a great number of crew members.
Keeping yourself clean and squared away will benefit
you and the people you come into contact with on a
daily basis.

Another topic covered here is sexually transmitted
diseases. Being attracted to a member of the opposite
sex is a natural reaction. Be aware of the possibility that
if you engage in multiple sexual relations, you could
become infected with one of the sexually transmitted
diseases discussed in this chapter. Being responsible in
your sexual relations and using approved protective
measures will go a long way toward protecting yourself.

14-32

REVIEW 1 ANSWERS

A8. The symptoms of airway blockage are—

A1. The primary purpose of first aid is to safe lives,
prevent further injury, and limit infection.

A2. The primary tasks to take when you administer

first aid are to—

a. maintain breathing,

a. Inability of the victim to speak

b. Exaggerated breathing efforts

c. Skin turning blue

b. stop bleeding and maintain circulation, and

airway are—

A9. The four methods you can use to clear a person’s

c. prevent or treat shock.

A3. The general first-aid rule for—

a. shock is to place the victim on his/her back
with the head slightly lower than the feet

b. broken bones is to keep the person still until

you immobilize the injured part

a. Standing abdominal thrust

b. Reclining abdominal thrust

c. Standing chest thrust

d. Reclining chest thrust

c. transport of injured persons is on the litter

REVIEW 3 ANSWERS

with the litter carried feet first

REVIEW 2 ANSWERS

A1. The three types of blood vessels the body uses to

circulate blood are—

a. Arteries—large vessels that carry blood

A1. The first-aid treatment for respiratory failure is

away from the heart

b. Veins—large vessels that carry blood back

to the heart

c. Capillaries—a connecting network of
smaller vessels between the arteries and the
veins

A2. Hemorrhage is severe enough to endanger life

when arteries or veins are cut.

A3. A loss of 2 pints of blood is usually enough to

cause shock.

A4. Blood carried by—

a. Capillaries is brick red

b. Veins is dark red

c. Arteries is bright red

A5. The only way to stop serious bleeding is the

application of pressure.

artificial ventilation.

A2. Artificial ventilation should be administered
only when natural breathing has stopped.
NEVER give artificial ventilation to a person
who is still breathing.

A3. The three types of artificial ventilation are—

a. Mouth to mouth

b. Mouth to nose

c. Back pressure/arm lift

A4. Cardiac arrest is the complete stoppage of

heart function.

A5. To be effective, CPR must be started within 4

minutes of the onset of cardiac arrest.

A6. When you use the one-rescuer technique of CPR,
the ratio of compressions to ventilations is 15
compressions to 2 ventilations.

A7. When you use the two-rescuer technique of CPR,
the ratio of compressions to ventilations is 5
compressions to 1 ventilation.

14-33

A6. A constricting band is a pad, a band, and a
device for tightening the band so that the
blood vessels will be compressed. Only use a
constricting band when hemorrhage can’t be
controlled any other way. Constricting bands
are used above the wound. They aren’t used
for wounds on the head, neck, or body.

A7. When a constricting band or a battle dressing has
been applied, only medical personnel should
release/remove it.

A8. A battle dressing is a combination compress
and bandage, in which a sterile gauze pad is
fastened to a gauze, muslin, or adhesive
bandage.

A9. When applying a battle dressing, you should
make sure that the dressing covers the entire
wound.

REVIEW 4 ANSWERS

A1. Shock is a condition where the blood

circulation is seriously disturbed.

A2. The symptoms of shock in a person are—

REVIEW 5 ANSWERS

A1. In the Navy, the most frequent suicide victim is
an enlisted male between 17 and 24 years old
and in paygrades E-1 through E-6.

A2. The most common causes of suicide are—

a. Breakup of a close relationship

b. Death of a loved one

c. Loss of social or financial status

d. Effects of drugs and/or alcohol

A3. Depression is often associated with suicide.

A4. Some actions you can take if you believe

someone is suicidal are—

a. Take all threats seriously

b. Confront the problem

c. Answer cries for help

a. Weak and rapid pulse

d. Let the person know you care

b. Shallow, rapid, and irregular breathing

e. Listen

c. Lower temperature—the arms, face, and

legs feel cold to the touch

d. Sweating

f. Get professional help

g. Don’t leave the person alone

e. Pale skin color; however, in some cases, it

may be bluish or reddish

f. Dilated (enlarged) pupils

REVIEW 6 ANSWERS

A1. Burns are defined as follows:

g. Thirst and an feeling of weakness,

faintness, or dizziness

A3. True, you should keep an injured person warm
enough to be comfortable, but not warm enough
to become overheated.

A4. If you suspect that a person is in shock, you
should keep the person lying flat on his/her
back with the feet slightly elevated (raised) so
that the position encourages the blood to flow
back to the brain.

a. First-degree burn—Mildest burn. Slight
redness, tenderness, and increased
temperature of the burned area.

b. Second-degree burn—More serious than
first-degree burn. Inner skin may be
damaged, blistering, severe pain, some
dehydration, and possible shock.

c. Third-degree burn—Most serious burn.
Skin is destroyed and possibly tissue and
muscle beneath it. Skin may be charred or
white and lifeless (from scalds). Some form
of shock will result.

14-34

A2. By immersing the burned area in cold water or by
applying cold compresses, you minimize pain
and reduce the burning effect in deeper layers
of the skin.

A3. If a burn covers more than 20% of a victim’s
body, you should apply sterile, dry bandages.

A4. When treating burns you should NEVER apply
petrolatum gauze, break blisters or apply
butter, lard, or Vaseline™.

c. Creaking or cracking

d. Inability to use the part

e. Motion at points other than joints

f. Swelling

g. Deformity

REVIEW 7 ANSWERS

A3. To give first aid to someone with a fractured leg

or arm, you should—

A1. The three most important signs of heatstroke

a. Get medical aid as soon as possible

are—

a. Dry, hot skin

b. Constricted pupils

c. Very high body temperature (usually above

105ºF)

A2. The three most
exhaustion are—

important signs of heat

a. Moist, clammy skin

b. Dilated pupils

b. Don’t move the victim until splints have
been applied, unless the victim’s life is in
danger

c. Treat for shock

d. Don’t try to find a fracture by grating the

ends of the bone together

e. Don’t try to set a broken bone

f. If a long bone in the leg is fractured,
carefully straighten the leg so it can be
immobilized

c. Normal or subnormal temperature

g. Apply splints

A3. The aim of first-aid treatment for heatstroke or
heat exhaustion is to reduce body temperature.

A4. The types of fractures that should be treated by

medical personnel are—

A4. True, in case of heatstroke/heat exhaustion, you
should transport the victim to a medical facility
as soon as possible.

REVIEW 8 ANSWERS

a. Jaw

b. Ribs

c. Spine

A1. Fractures are—

a. Closed fracture

b. Open fracture

A2. The symptoms of a fractured leg or arm

include—

a. Pain and tenderness

A5. You should never move a person who might have
a fractured spine or neck because moving that
person might cause permanent paralysis.

A6. The symptoms a victim might have with a

sprained or strained leg include—

a. Pain, lameness, stiffness, or pressure

b. Pain on movement

b. Discoloration of the skin

c. Swelling and tenderness

14-35

d. Discoloration

A2. The three most common dental conditions

caused by poor dental hygiene are—

e. With a strain, a distinct gap at the site of the

injury

a. Tooth decay

b. Reddening of the gums

c. Gum and bone disease

A3. To avoid dental problems, you should—

a. Brush your teeth

b. Floss your teeth

c. Have dental checkups every 6 months

A4. The two most common sexually transmitted

diseases are—

a. Syphilis

b. Gonorrhea

A5. AIDS is spread through—

a. Sexual contact

b. Needle sharing by drug users

c. Transfusions

A7. The first aid that should be given to a victim
suspected of having a sprained or strained leg
includes treating all sprains as fractures until
ruled out by X-rays.

REVIEW 9 ANSWERS

A1. One of the easiest ways to carry an unconscious
person is to use the fireman’s lift/carry.

A2. When rescuing a person who has received an
electric shock, you should not touch the
victim’s body, wire, or any other object that
may conduct electricity.

A3. You should carry a stretcher with the victim’s
feet first so the rear stretcher bearer can see
the victim for signs of breathing difficulty.

A4. To transport an injured person from engine-room
spaces, a Neil Robertson stretcher is usually
used.

A5. Emergency rescue lines are used when an
injured person must be transported and no
other means is available.

REVIEW 10 ANSWERS

A1. Personal hygiene is important for the following

reasons:

a. Close living quarters

b. Well-being of the crew

c. Reduced chance of illness

d. Morale increase

14-36

