Summary 

The purpose of this book is to provide 
Americans with information and instructions that 
will significantly increase their chances of surviving a 
possible nuclear attack. It brings together field-tested 
instructions that, if followed by a large fraction of 
Americans during a crisis that preceded an attack, 
could save millions of lives. The author is convinced 
that the vulnerability of our country to nuclear threat 
or attack must be reduced and that the wide dis- 
semination of the information contained in this book 
would help achieve that objective of our overall 
defense strategy. 

Underlying the advocacy of Americans'learning 
these down-to-earth survival skills is the belief that if 
one prepares for the worst, the worst is less likely to 
happen. Effective American civil defense prepara- 
tions would reduce the probability of nuclear 
blackmail and war. Yet in our world of increasing 
dangers, it is significant that the United States spends 
much less per capita on civil defense than many other 
countries. The United States'annual funding is about 
50 cents per capita, whereas Switzerland spends 
almost SI 1 and, most importantly, the Soviet Union 
spends approximately $20. 

In the first chapter the myths and facts about the 
consequences of a massive nuclear attack are 
discussed. As devastating as such an attack would be, 
with adequate civil defense preparations and timely 
warning much of the population could survive. 

The information and instructions given in 
subsequent chapters tell the average citizen how to 
improve his and his family's chances of surviving a 
nuclear attack by working together to build 
expedient shelters and homemade life-support 
equipment. The reader is urged to make at least some 
of these low-cost preparations before a crisis arises. 
The main emphasis, however, is on survival prepara- 
tions that could be made in the last few days of a 
worsening crisis. 

This book includes chapters on psychological 
preparations, warning and communications, and 
evacuation. Because the greatest need would be for 
shelter that would provide good protection against 
fallout radiation and also would permit prolonged 
occupancy, much of the book deals with this subject. 
These chapters describe the building of expedient 
shelters, their ventilation and cooling, the purifica- 
tion and storage of adequate water, the processing 
and cooking of whole grains and legumes, fallout 
meters, protection against fires and carbon monox- 
ide, and expedient furnishings for shelters. Other 
chapters cover sanitation and preventive medicine, 
medical advice for nuclear survivors lacking the help 
of doctors, improvised footwear and clothing, and 
advice on minimum preparations that can be made at 
low cost and should be made before a crisis arises. 

One appendix of the handbook gives detailed, 
field-tested instructions for building six types of 
earth-covered expedient fallout shelters, with criteria 
to guide the choice of which shelter to build. The 
design features of several types of expedient blast 
shelters are described in another appendix. Two 
others contain instructions for making an efficient 
shelter-ventilating pump and a homemade fallout 
meter that is accurate and dependable. Both of these 
essentials can be made with inexpensive materials 
found in most households. Drawings are used 
extensively, as are photographs of people actually 
building and living in the various shelters. 

This first-of-its-kind report is primarily a 
compilation and summary of civil defense measures 
and inventions developed at ORNL over the past 
14 years and field-tested in six states, from Florida to 
Utah. It is the first comprehensive handbook of 
survival information for use by untrained citizens 
who want to improve their chances of surviving a 
possible nuclear attack. 

Preceding page blank 

VI 

Civil defense officials and others who realize the so that sections may be easily excerpted and 
need for improved, field-tested instructions will find reproduced for mass distribution through news 
much new and useful information in Nuclear War media. 
Survival Skills. Information in the book is organized 

Foreword 

When the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission 
authorized me in 1964 to initiate the Civil Defense 
Project at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, one of 
the first researchers I recruited was Cresson H. 
Kearny, the author of this book. Most of his life has 
been preparation, unplanned and planned, for 
writing this guide to help people not familiar with the 
effects of nuclear weapons improve their chances of 
surviving a nuclear attack. During the past 15 years 
he has done an unequaled amount of practical field 
work on basic survival problems, without always 
conforming with the changing civil defense doctrine. 

After I returned to my professional duties at 
Princeton in 1966, the civil defense effort at Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory was first headed by 
James C. Bresee, and is now headed by Conrad V. 
Chester. Both have wholeheartedly supported 
Kearny's down-to-earth research, and Chester not 
only was a co-developer of several of the survival 
items described in this book, but also participated in 
the planning of the experiments testing them. 

Kearny's concern with nuclear war dangers 
began while he was taking a degree in civil 
engineering at Princeton—he graduated summa cum 
laude in 1937. His Princeton studies had already 
acquainted him with the magnitude of an explosion 
in which nuclear energy is liberated, then only a 
theoretical possibility. After winning a Rhodes 
Scholarship, Kearny took two degrees in geology at 
Oxford. Still before the outbreak of World War II, he 
observed the very effective preparations made in 
England to reduce the effects of aerial attacks. He 
had a deep aversion to dictatorships, whether from 
the right or left, and during the Munich crisis he acted 
as a courier for an underground group helping anti- 
Nazis escape from Czechoslovakia. 

in the jungles of Venezuela. He has traveled also in 
Mexico, China, and the Philippines. 

A year before Pearl Harbor, realizing that the 
United States would soon be at war and that our 
jungle troops should have at least as good personal 
equipment, food, and individual medical supplies as 
do exploration geologists, he quit his job with the 
Standard Oil Company of Venezuela, returned to the 
United States, and went on active duty as an infantry 
reserve lieutenant. Kearny was soon assigned to 
Panama as the Jungle Experiment Officer of the 
Panama Mobile Force. In that capacity he was able 
to improve or invent, and then thoroughly jungle- 
test, much of the specialized equipment and rations 
used by our jungle infantrymen in World War II. For 
this work he was promoted to major and awarded the 
Legion of Merit. 

To take his chances in combat, in 1944 the 
author volunteered for duty with the Office of 
Strategic Services. As a demolition specialist helping 
to limit the Japanese invasion then driving into the 
wintry mountains of southern China, he saw mass 
starvation and death at close hand. The experiences 
gained in this capacity also resulted in an increased 
understanding of both the physical and the emotional 
problems of people whose country is under attack. 

Worry about the increasing dangers of nuclear 
war and America's lack of civil defense caused the 
author in 1961 to consult Herman Kahn, a leading 
nuclear strategist. Kahn, who was at that time 
forming a nonprofit war-research organization, the 
Hudson Institute, offered him work as a research 
analyst. Two years of civil defense research in this 
"think tank" made the author much more know- 
ledgeable of survival problems. 

Following graduation from Oxford, Kearny did 
geological exploration work in the Andes of Peru and 

In 1964 he joined the Oak Ridge civil defense 
project and since then Oak Ridge has been Kearny's 

vu 

Vlll 

base of operations, except for two years during the 
height of the Viet Nam war. For his Viet Nam work 
on combat equipment, and also for his contributions 
to preparations for improving survivability in the 
event of a nuclear war, he received the Army's 
Decoration for Distinguished Civilian Service in 
1972. 

This book draws extensively on Keamy's 
understanding of the problems of civil defense 
acquired as a result of his own field testing of shelters 
and other survival needs, and also from an intensive 
study of the serious civil defense preparations 
undertaken by other countries, including Switzer- 
land, Sweden, the USSR, and China. He initiated 

and edited the Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
translations of Soviet civil defense handbooks and of 
a Chinese manual, and gained additional knowledge 
from these new sources. Trips to England, Europe, 
and Israel also increased his information on survival 
measures, and this also contributed to the Nuclear 
War Survival Skills. However, the book advocates 
principally those do-it-yourself instructions that field 
tests have proved to be practical. 

^lu^Uu '/'< tUcQ^ui^^ 

-Eugene P. Wigner 

May, 1979 

Acknowledgments 

The author takes this opportunity to thank the 

following persons for their special contributions: 

L. Joe Deal, James L. Liverman, and W. W. 
Schroebel for the essential support they made 
possible over the years, first by the U.S. Atomic 
Energy Commission, then by the Energy Research 
and Development Administration, and currently by 
the Department of Energy. This support was the 
basis of the laboratory work and field testing that 
produced most of the survival instructions given in 
this book. Mr. Schroebel also reviewed early and 
final drafts and made a number of improvements. 

John A. Auxier, Ph.D., health physicist, 
Director of Industrial Safety and Applied Health 
Physics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
(ORNL)—for manuscript review and especially for 
checking statements regarding the effects of radiation 
on people. 

Conrad V. Chester, Ph.D., chemical engineer, 
civil defense researcher, developer of improved 
defenses against exotic weapons and unconventional 
attacks, nuclear strategist, and currently Head of the 
Solar and Special Studies Section, Energy Division, 
ORNL—for advice and many contributions, starting 
with the initial organization of material for this 
book and continuing through all the drafts. 

William K. Chipman, LLD, Deputy Assistant 
Director for Plans, Defense Civil Preparedness 
Agency—for review of the final draft. 

George A. Cristy, M.S., chemical engineer and 
civil defense researcher at ORNL—for contributions 
to the planning of this book and editing of early 
drafts. 

Kay B. Franz, Ph.D., nutritionist, Assistant 
Professor, Food Science and Nutrition Department, 
Brigham Young University—for information and 
advice used extensively in the food chapter. 

Samuel Glasstone, Ph.D., physical chemist and 
the leading authority on the effects of nuclear 
weapons—for overall review and constructive 
recommendations, especially regarding simplified 
explanations of the effects of nuclear weapons. 

Carsten M. Haaland, M.S., physicist and civil 
defense researcher at ORNL—for scientific advice 
and mathematical computations of complex nuclear 
phenomena. 

Robert H. Kupperman, Ph.D., physicist, Chief 
Scientist, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency, Department of State—for review of the final 
draft. 

David B. Nelson, Ph.D., electrical engineer and 
mathematician, civil defense and thermonuclear 
energy researcher at ORNL, an authority on electro- 
magnetic pulse (EMP) problems—for manuscript 
review and contributions to sections on electro- 
magnetic pulse phenomena and communications. 

Lewis V. Spencer, Ph.D., physicist, Radiation 
Physics Division, Center for Radiation Research, 
National Bureau of Standards—for his calculations 
and advice regarding needed improvements in the 
design of blast shelters to assure adequate protection 
of occupants against excessive exposure to initial 
nuclear radiation. 

Eugene P. Wigner, Ph.D., physicist and mathe- 
matician, Nobel laureate, Professor Emeritus of 
Theoretical Physics, Princeton University, a princi- 
pal initiator of the Nuclear Age and a prominent 
leader of the civil defense movement—for encourag- 
ing the writing of this book, contributing the 
Foreword section, and improving drafts, especially 
of the appendix on expedient blast shelters. 

Edwin N. York, M.S. Nuclear Physics, Re- 
search Specialist in Survivability/ Vulnerability with 
the Boeing Aerospace Company, and designer 

IX 

of blast-protective structures—for overall review and 
recommendations, particularly those based on his 
extensive participation in nuclear and conventional 
blast tests. 

Civil defense officials in Washington and several 
states for information concerning strengths and 
weaknesses of official civil defense preparations. 

Helen C. Jernigan for editing the manuscript, 
and especially for helping to clarify technical details 
for non-technical readers. 

May E. Kearny for her work on the index and 

assistance with editing. 

Ruby N. Thurmer for advice and assistance with 

editing. 

Marjorie E. Fish for her work on the-photo- 

graphs and drawings. 

Debra A. Swaggerty for initial typing and word 

processing of the manuscript. 

Introduction 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This book is written for the majority of 
Americans who, in a crisis threatening nuclear war, 
would want to improve their chances of surviving. It 
brings together field-tested instructions that have 
enabled untrained Americans to make expedient 
fallout shelters, air pumps to ventilate and cool 
shelters, fallout meters, and other expedient life- 
support equipment. ("Expedient," as used in civil 
defense work, describes equipment that can be made 
by untrained citizens in 48 hours or less, while guided 
solely by field-tested, written instructions and using 
only widely available materials and tools.) Successive 
versions of these instructions have been used 
repeatedly and successfully by families working 
under simulated crisis conditions. These instructions 
have been improved repeatedly by Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory civil defense researchers over a 
period of eight years and are the heart of this book. 

The average American has far too little 
information that would help him and his family and 
our country survive a nuclear attack, and many of his 
beliefs about nuclear war are both false and 
dangerous. Since the A-bomb blasted Hiroshima and 
hurled mankind into the Nuclear Age, only during a 
recognized crisis threatening nuclear war have most 
Americans been seriously interested in improving 
their chances of surviving a nuclear attack. Both 
during and following the Cuban Missile Crisis in 
1962, millions of Americans built fallout shelters or 
tried to obtain survival information. At that time the 
available survival information was inadequate, and 
dangerously faulty in some respects. Widespread 
recognition of these civil defense shortcomings has 
contributed to the acceptance by most Americans of 
one or both of two false beliefs: 

One of these false beliefs is that nuclear war 
would be such a terrible catastrophe that it is an 
unthinkable impossibility. If this were true, there 

would be no logical reason to worry about nuclear 
war or to make preparations to survive a nuclear 
attack. 

The second false belief is that if a nuclear war 
were to break out, it would be the end of mankind. If 
this were true, a rational person would not try to 
improve his chances of surviving the unsurvivable. 

This book gives facts that show these beliefs are 
false. History shows that once a weapon is invented it 
remains ready for use in the arsenals of some nations 
and in time will be used. Researchers who have spent 
much time and effort learning the facts about effects 
of nuclear weapons now know that all-out nuclear 
war would not be the end of mankind or of 
civilization. Even if our country remained unpre- 
pared and were to be subjected to an all-out nuclear 
attack, many millions of Americans would survive 
and be in favorable conditions to live through 
difficult post-attack years. 

PRESIDENT CARTER'S NEW 
CIVIL DEFENSE POLICY 

President Carter, on September 29, 1978, 
directed that a new civil defense policy be put into 
effect. This is the first U.S. policy that officially 
recognizes the importance of civil defense as a means 
for decreasing the danger of a nuclear attack on the 
United States or of intimidation by nuclear threats. 

The guidelines to be used in carrying out this 
new policy (Presidential Decision41) were accurately 
stated by Bardyl R. Tirana, Director of the Defense 
Civil Preparedness Agency, in his March 22, 1979 
statement to the House Committee on Appropria- 
tions, as follows: 

".. .that the United States civil defense program 
should enhance the survivability of the Ameri- 
can people and its leadership in the event of 
nuclear war, thereby improving the basis for 

I 

eventual recovery, as well as reducing vulnera- 
bility to a major Soviet attack; 

"... that the United States civil defense pro- 
gram should enhance deterrence and stability, 
and contribute to perceptions of the overall 
U.S./Soviet strategic balance and to crisis 
stability, and also reduce the possibility that the 
Soviets could coerce us in times of increased 
tension; 

"... that the policy not suggest any change in the 
U.S. policy of relying on strategic nuclear forces 
as the preponderant factor in maintaining 
deterrence; and, 

"... that the program include planning for 
population relocation during times of interna- 
tional crisis as well as be adaptable to help deal 
with natural disasters and other peacetime 
emergencies." 

The initial step toward carrying out President 
Carter's policy decision is a civil defense budget 
request of $108.6 million for fiscal year 1980. If this 
slight increase in Federal funding is voted, the annual 
outlay will amount to about 50 cents per year for each 
American. In contrast, Switzerland spends $10.85 per 
citizen on civil defense, according to the Swiss Civil 
Defense Magazine of November-December 1977. 
Differing estimates of the Soviet Union's civil defense 
efforts indicate that the annual outlay for these 
preparations, if they were made at costs equivalent to 
those in the United States, would range from $8 to 
$20 for each Russian. 

PRACTICALITY OF MAKING SURVIVAL 
PREPARATIONS DURING A CRISIS 

The emphasis in this book is on survival 
preparations that can be made in the last few days of a 
worsening crisis. However, the measures put into 
effect during such a crisis can be very much more 
effective if plans and some preparations are com- 
pleted well in advance. It is hoped that persons who 
read this book will be motivated at least to make the 
preparations outlined in Chapter 16, Minimum Pre- 
Crisis Preparations. 

Well-informed persons realize that a nuclear 
attack is unlikely to be a Pearl-Harbor-type of attack, 
launched without warning. Strategists agree that a 

nuclear war would most likely begin after a period of 
days-to-months of worsening crisis. The most 
realistic of the extensive Russian plans and prepara- 
tions to survive a nuclear war are based on using at 
least several days during an escalating crisis to get 
most urban dwellers out of the cities, to build or 
improve shelters in all parts of the Soviet Union, and 
to protect essential machinery and the like. Our 
satellites and other sources of intelligence would 
reveal such massive movements within a day; 
therefore, under the most likely circumstances 
Americans would have several days in which to make 
life-saving preparations. The Russians know that if 
they are able to complete evacuation and sheltering 
plans before the outbreak of nuclear war, the number 
of their people killed would be a small fraction of 
those who otherwise would die. 

The Russians have learned from the devastating 
wars they have survived that people are the most 
important asset to be saved. Russian civil defense 
publications emphasize Lenin's justly famous state- 
ment: "The primary productive factor of all human- 
ity is the laboring man, the worker. If he survives, we 
can save everything and restore everything.. . but we 
shall perish if we are not able to save him." Strategists 
conclude that those in power in the Soviet Union will 
neither threaten nuclear war in a confrontation nor 
launch a nuclear attack until they have evacuated and 
sheltered most of their people. 

Nuclear weapons that could strike the United 
States continue to increase in both number and 
accuracy. The Soviet Union already has enough to 
target all American cities, major military targets, and 
long runways. The most modern warheads usually 
can hit within a few hundred yards of their precise 
targets. Because most Americans live in cities, their 
best chance of surviving a heavy nuclear attack is to 
get out of cities and into shelters away from probable 
target areas before the attack. Many American civil 
defense advocates believe it would be desirable for 
our government to build and stock permanent 
shelters, widely dispersed outside probable target 
areas. However, such permanent shelters would cost 
many billions of dollars and would be in competition 
with other more immediate needs requiring large 
expenditures of government funds. Therefore, field- 
tested instructions and plans are needed to enable 
both urban evacuees and rural Americans to build 
expedient shelters and life-support equipment during 
a crisis. 

THE NEED FOR RELIABLE INSTRUCTIONS 
FOR BUILDING EXPEDIENT SHELTERS AND 
ESSENTIAL LIFE-SUPPORT EQUIPMENT 

Our country's civil defense organization, the 
Defense Civil Preparedness Agency, is quietly 
working on urban evacuation plans called Crisis 
Relocation Planning. This promising official effort 
includes the preparation and field testing of instruc- 
tions for making expedient shelters and a few 
expedient life-support items. For years it has been the 
policy of U.S. civil defense organizations to prepare 
abbreviated survival instructions for distribution to 
the public during a possible crisis. Official printed 
instructions for making a shelter or a survival item 
each have been limited to about a page. Field tests in 
1977 of such abbreviated instructions have shown 
that typical American families, building shelters and 
homemade air pumps under simulated crisis condi- 
tions, have taken longer and made more mistakes 
than have similar families who followed the step-by- 
step, detailed instructions given in this book. For 
example, 16 families each followed one-page instruc- 
tions and built one of seven types of expedient 
shelters; each family found it necessary to spend a 
long time (an average of 88 minutes) studying the 
abbreviated instructions for building the assigned 
shelter. 

Ten of these 16 families attempted to follow the 
abbreviated instructions for making a homemade air 
pump of the type described in this book for 
ventilating and cooling shelters. Only four of the 10 
succeeded in making a pump that worked. In 
contrast, almost all of the dozens of different families 
who have followed the step-by-step instructions 
given in this book for making a ventilating pump 
have succeeded. 

The author and his associates are sure that even 
better, perhaps shorter, instructions could be 
developed by repeated field testing. However, the 
basic survival instructions given on the following 
pages are likely to remain for some years the best that 
could be made available to millions of unprepared 
Americans. 

EXOTIC WEAPONS 

Chemical and biological weapons and neutron 
warheads are called "exotic weapons." Protective 
measures against these weapons are not discussed, 
because the purpose of this handbook is to help 
Americans improve their chances of surviving what is 

by far the most likely type of attack on the United 
States: a nuclear war. 

Chemical weapons are inefficient killing agents 
compared to large nuclear warheads and bombs. 
Exterminating the unprepared population of a 
specified large area would require a delivered 
payload of deadly chemical weapons many thou- 
sands of times heavier than that needed if large 
nuclear weapons were employed. 

Biological weapons are unreliable. Unless the 
meteorological conditions were favorable over the 
entire country at the same time, viruses and bacteria 
could not be effectively dispersed for spreading 
disease. 

Neutron warheads are very small, yet extremely 
expensive. A 1-kiloton neutron warhead costs about 
as much as a 1-megaton ordinary warhead, but the 
ordinary warhead not only has 1000 times the 
explosive power but also can be surface-burst to 
cover a very large area with deadly fallout. 

RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 
BEFORE A CRISIS 

During a crisis threatening nuclear attack, 
present uncertainties relative to the adoption and 
distribution of crisis information seem likely to 
continue. Thoroughly field-tested survival instruc- 
tions may not be available to the majority of our 
people. Furthermore, even a highly intelligent 
citizen, if given the best possible instructions during a 
crisis, would not have time to learn basic facts about 
nuclear dangers and the reasons for various survival 
preparations. Without this understanding, a person 
cannot do his best at following any type of survival 
instructions. 

A prudent citizen is advised to obtain and study 
the best instructions available before a crisis occurs. 
Better yet, he should make preparations, such as the 
low-cost ones described in this book, to increase his 
and his family's chances of surviving. 

By following the instructions in this book, you 
and your family can increase the odds favoring your 
survival. If such instructions were made available and 
our government urged all Americans to follow them 
during a worsening crisis, additional millions would 
survive an attack. And the danger of an attack, even 
the threat of an attack, would be decreased if an 
enemy nation knew that we had significantly 
improved our defenses in this way. 

Chapter 1 

The Dangers from Nuclear Weapons: Myths and Facts 

An all-out nuclear war between Russia and the 
United States would be the worst catastrophe in 
history, a tragedy so huge it is difficult to compre- 
hend. Even so, it would be far from the end of human 
life on earth. The dangers from nuclear weapons have 
been distorted and exaggerated, for varied reasons. 
These exaggerations have become demoralizing 
myths, believed by millions of Americans. 

While working with hundreds of Americans 
building expedient shelters and life-support equip- 
ment, I have found that many people at first see no 
sense in talking about details of survival skills. Those 
who hold exaggerated beliefs about the dangers from 
nuclear weapons must first be convinced that nuclear 
war would not inevitably be the end of them and 
everything worthwhile. Only after they have begun to 

question the truth of these myths do they become 
interested, under normal peacetime conditions, in 
acquiring nuclear war survival skills. Therefore, 
before giving detailed instructions for making and 
using survival equipment, we will examine the most 
harmful of the myths about nuclear war dangers, 
along with some of the grim facts. 

• Myth: Fallout radiation from a nuclear war 
would poison the air and all parts of the environment. 
It would kill everyone. (This is the demoralizing 
message of On the Beach and many similar pseudo- 
scientific books and articles.) 

9 Facts: When a nuclear weapon explodes near 
enough to the ground for its fireball to touch the 
ground, it forms a crater. (See .1.) Many 

OR NL-DWG 78-6264 

WIND 

■'■'tr:-(fif r Uw.-V.v'-' 

•.••V •VO' » v ¥,'•' ..vv FALLOUT 
FALLOUT 
PARTICLES 
STARTING 
TO FALL 

.1. A surface burst. In a surface burst, the fireball touches the ground and blasts a crater. 

thousands of tons of earth from the crater of a large 
explosion are pulverized into trillions of particles. 
These particles are contaminated by radioactive 
atoms produced by the nuclear explosion. Thou- 
sands of tons of the particles are carried up into a 
mushroom-shaped cloud, miles above the earth. 
These radioactive particles then fall out of the 
mushroom cloud, or out of the dispersing cloud of 
particles blown by the winds—thus becoming fallout. 

Each sand-like, contaminated particle continu- 
ously gives off invisible radiation, much like a tiny X- 
ray machine—while in the mushroom cloud, while 
descending, and after having fallen to earth. The 
descending radioactive particles are carried by the 
winds like the sand and dust particles of a miles-thick 
sandstorm cloud—except that they usually are blown 
at lower speeds and in many areas the particles are so 
far apart that no cloud is seen. The largest, heaviest 
fallout particles reach the ground first, rn locations 
close to the explosion. Many smaller riarticles are 
carried by the winds for tens to hundreds of miles 
before falling to earth. At any one place where fallout 
from a single explosion is being deposited on the 
ground in concentrations high enough to require the 
use of shelters, deposition will be completed within a 
few hours. 

The smallest fallout particles—those tiny 
enough to be inhaled into a person's lungs—are 
invisible to the naked eye. These tiny particles fall so 
slowly, from heights miles above the earth, that the 
winds carry them thousands of miles away from the 
site of the explosion before they reach the ground. 

The air in properly designed fallout shelters, 
even those without air filters, is free of radioactive 
particles and safe to breathe except in a few rare 
environments—as will be explained later. 

Fortunately for all living things, the danger from 
fallout radiation lessens with time. The radioactive 
decay, as this lessening is called, is rapid at first, then 
gets slower and slower. The dose rate (the amount of 
radiation received per hour) decreases accordingly. 
.2 illustrates the rapidity of the decay of 
radiation from fallout during the first two days after 
the nuclear explosion that produced it. R stands for 
roentgen, a measurement unit often used to measure 
exposure to gamma rays and X rays. Fallout meters 
called dosimeters measure the dose received by 
recording the number of R. Fallout meters called 
survey meters, or dose-rate meters, measure the dose 
rate by recording the number of R being received per 
hour at the time of measurement. Notice that it takes 
about seven times as long for the dose rate to decay 

ORNL-DWG 78-6265 

900 

800 

700 — 

«£ »too __ 1 
EC 

Ui 

< SOG — \^~ 480 R/hr 
E 
LM m 
O 
Q 

Y 2 hr AFTER 

400 

300 

200 

100 

• 100 R/hr 
7 hr AFTER 

-43 R/hr 

14 hr AFTER 

10 r/hr 
«8 hr AFTER ■ 

0 12 3 4 5 6 7 

1^imt*i°iji°i-°HH--f-f4H 

HOURS AFTER THE EXPLOSION 

.2. Decay of the dose rate of radiation from fallout. 

from 1000roentgensperhour(1000R/hr)to 10R/hr 
(48 hours) as to decay from 1000 R/hrto 100 R/hr(7 
hours). (Only in high-fallout areas would the dose 
rate 1 hour after the explosion be as high as 1000 
roentgens per hour.) 

If the dose rate 1 hour after an explosion is 10C0 
R/hr, it would take about 2 weeks for the dose rate to 
be reduced to 1 R/ hr solely as a result of radioactive 
decay. Weathering effects will reduce the dose rate 
further; for example, rain can wash fallout particles 
from plants and houses to lower positions on or 
closer to the ground. Surrounding objects would 
reduce the radiation dose from these low-lying 
particles. 

.2 also illustrates the fact that at a 
typical location where a given amount of fallout from 
an explosion is deposited later than 1 hour after the 
explosion, the highest dose rate and the total dose 
received at that location are less than at a location 
where the same amount of fallout is deposited 1 hour 
after the explosion. The longer fallout particles have 
been airborne before reaching the ground, the less 
dangerous is their radiation. 

Within two weeks after an attack the occupants 
of most shelters could safely stop using them, or 
could work outside the shelters for an increasing 
number of hours each day. Exceptions would be in 
areas of extremely heavy fallout such as might occur 
downwind from important targets attacked with 
many weapons, especially missile sites and very large 
cities. To know when to come out safely, occupants 
either would need a reliable fallout meter to measure 
the changing radiation dangers, or must receive 
information based on measurements made nearby 
with a reliable instrument. 

The radiation dose that will kill a person varies 
considerably with different people. A dose of 450 R 
resulting from exposure of the whole body to fallout 
radiation is often said to be the dose that will kill 
about half the persons receiving it, although most 
studies indicate that it would take somewhat less. 
(Note: A number written after a statement refers the 
reader to a source listed in the Selected References 
that follow Appendix D.) Almost all persons 
confined to expedient shelters after a nuclear attack 
would be under stress and without clean surround- 
ings or antibiotics to fight infections. Many also 
would lack adequate water and food. Under these 
unprecedented conditions, perhaps half the persons 
who received a whole-body dose of 350 R within a few 
days would die." 

Fortunately, the human body can repair most 
radiation damage if the daily radiation doses are not 
too large. As will be explained in Appendix B, a 
person who is healthy and has not been exposed in 
the past two weeks to a total radiation dose of more 
than 100 R can receive a dose of 6 R each day for at 
least two months without being incapacitated. 

Only a very small fraction of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki citizens who survived radiation doses— 
some of which were nearly fatal—have suffered 
serious delayed effects. The reader should realize that 
to do essential work after a massive nuclear attack, 
many survivors must be willing to receive much 
larger radiation doses than are normally permissible. 
Otherwise, too many workers would stay inside 
shelter too much of the time, and work that would be 
vital to national recovery could not be done. For 
example, if the great majority of truckers were so 
fearful of receiving even non-incapacitating radiation 
doses that they would refuse to transport food, 
additional millions would die from starvation alone. 

• Myth: Fallout radiation penetrates everything; 
there is no, escaping its deadly effects. 

•■ Facts: Some gamma radiation from fallout will 
penetrate the shielding materials of even an excellent 
shelter and reach its occupants. However, the 
radiation dose that the occupants of an excellent 
shelter would receive while inside this shelter can be 
reduced to a dose smaller than the average American 
receives during his lifetime from X rays and other 
radiation exposures normal in America today. The 
design features of such a shelter include the use of a 
sufficient thickness of earth or other heavy shielding 
material. Gamma rays are like X rays, but more 
penetrating. .3 shows how rapidly gamma 
rays are reduced in number (but not in their ability to 
penetrate) by layers of packed earth. Each of the 
layers shown is one halving-thickness of packed 
earth—about 3.6 inches (9 centimeters).3 A halving- 
thickness is the thickness of a material which reduces 
by half the dose of radiation that passes through it. 

The actual paths of gamma rays passing through 
shielding materials are much more complicated, due 
to scattering, etc., than are the straight-line paths 
shown in .3. But when averaged out, the 
effectiveness of a halving-thickness of any material is 
approximately as shown. The denser a substance, the 
better it serves for shielding material. Thus, a 
halving-thickness of concrete is only about 2.4 inches 
(6.1cm). 

ORNl-DWG 78-18834 

• 5 HALVING-THICKNESSES OF - 
PACKED EARTH - IB INCHES 
(45 cm) 

3.6 in. 
19 cm) 

REDUCTIONS IN 
GAMMA RAYS 

PROTECTION 
FACTORS 

.3. Illustration of shielding against fallout radiation. Note the increasingly large improvements in the 
attenuation (reduction) factors that are attained as each additional halving-thickness of packed earth is added. 

If additional halving-thicknesses of packed 
earth shielding are successively added to the five 
thicknesses shown in .3, the protection factor 
(PF) is successively increased from 32 to 64, to 128, to 
256, to 512, to 1024, and so on. 

A heavy nuclear attack would set 
practically everything on fire, causing "firestorms" in 
cities that would exhaust the oxygen in the air. All 
shelter occupants would be killed by the intense heat. 

On a clear day, thermal pulses (heat 
radiation that travels at the speed of light) from an air 
burst can set fire to easily ignitable materials (such as 

window curtains, upholstery', dry newspaper, and dry 
grass) over about as large an area as is damaged by 
the blast. It can cause second-degree skin burns to 
exposed people who are as far as ten miles from 
a one-megaton (1 MT) explosion. (See .4.) 
(A 1-MT nuclear explosion is one that produces the 
same amount of energy as does one million tons of 
TNT.) If the weather is very clear and dry, the area of 
fire danger could be considerably larger. On a cloudy 
or smoggy day, however, particles in the air would 
absorb and scatter much of the heat radiation, and 
the area endangered by heat radiation from the 
fireball would be less than the area of severe blast 
damage. 

ORNL-DWG 78-6267 

yzwws 
.4. An air burst. The fireball does not 
touch the ground. No crater, no deadly local fallout. 
The blast effects, the thermal pulses of intense light 
and heat radiation, and the very penetrating initial 
nuclear radiation are the main dangers. 

"Firestorms" could occur only when the 
concentration of combustible structures is very high, 
as in the very dense centers of a few old American 
cities. At rural and suburban building densities, most 
people in earth-covered fallout shelters would have 
nothing to fear from fire. 

• Myth: In the worst-hit parts of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki where all building« were demolished, 
everyone was killed by blast, radiation, or fire. 

• Facts: In Nagasaki, some people survived un- 
injured who were far inside tunnel shelters built for 
conventional air raids and located as "lose as one- 
third mile from ground zero (the point directly below 
the explosion). This was true even though these long, 
large shelters lacked blast doors and were deep inside 
the zone within which all buildings were destroyed. 
(People far inside long, large, open shelters are better 
protected than are those inside small, open shelters.) 

Many earth-covered family shelters were es- 
sentially undamaged in areas where blast and fire 
destroyed all buildings. .5 shows a typical 
earth-covered, backyard family shelter with a crude 
wooden frame. This shelter was essentially un- 
damaged, although less than 100 yards from ground 

.5. Undamaged earth-covered family 

shelter in Nagasaki. 

zero at Nagasaki.4 The calculated maximum over- 
pressure (pressure above the normal air pressure) was 
about 65 pounds per square inch (65 psi). Persons 
inside so small a shelter without a blast door would 
have been killed by blast pressure at this distance 
from the explosion. However, in a recent blast test,3 
an earth-covered, expedient Small-Pole Shelter 
equipped with blast doors was undamaged at 53 psi. 
The pressure rise inside was slight-—not even enough 
to have damaged occupants' eardrums. If poles are 
available, field tests have indicated that many 
families can build such shelters in a few days. 

The great life-saving potential of blast- 
protective shelters has been proven in war and 
confirmed by blast tests and calculations. For 
example, the area in which the surface-bursting of a 
20-megaton weapon would wreck a 50-psi shelter 
with blast doors is about 17 square miles. Within this 
roughly circular area, practically all the occupants of 
wrecked shelters would be killed by blast, carbon 
monoxide from fires, or radiation. The same blast 
effects would kill most people who were using 
basements affording 5 psi protection, over an area of 
about 186 square miles.6 

•' Myth: Because some modem H-bombs are over 
1000 times as powerful as the A-bomb that destroyed 
most of Hiroshima, these H-bombs are 1000 times as 
deadly and destructive. 

• Facts: A nuclear weapon 1000 times as powerful 
as the one that blasted Hiroshima, if exploded under 
comparable conditions, produces equally serious 
blast damage to wood-frame houses over an area up 

10 

to about 130 times as large, not 1000 times as large. 
However, the blast areas of multimegaton nuclear 
explosions are impressively large, and Americans 
concerned with survival should be aware of the 
destructive power of these huge weapons. For 
instance, a Soviet SS-9 missile reportedly can deliver 
a 20-megaton warhead. The explosion from such a 
weapon would release the same amount of energy as 
the explosion of 20 million tons of TNT. If a 20- 
megaton weapon were surface-burst (.1), the 
great majority of homes at least would be severely 
damaged to a distance of 10 to 11 miles from ground 
zero. Within a roughly circular area of about 350 
square miles, homes would be severely damaged or 
completely destroyed. 

In and close to the crater area of a large surface 
burst, even the best blast shelters would be 
obliterated or buried. In wet, hard rock, a 20- 
megaton contact surface burst would blast a crater 
about 550 feet deep. The ringlike, 200-foot-high hill 
of ejected rock around the crater would be almost a 
mile across. 

If a weapon is air-burst (see .4) at the most 
advantageous height to produce on the maximum 
area overpressures that are at least as high as a desired 
overpressure, it will cover with the desired blast effect 
an area that is about twice as large as the same 
weapon would cover if it were surface-burst. A 20- 
megaton air burst over the center of a great city would 
cause severe damage to homes as far as 16 miles from 
ground zero. Nearer to ground zero, the blast damage 
would be worse. However, the air-bursting of 
weapons would not result in the often deadly fallout 
particles that reach the ground within 24 hours after a 
surface burst. Therefore, for Americans outside 
target areas, this would be a less dangerous attack 
than if weapons were surface-burst. 

Although some strategists maintain that a 
limited attack is more probable than a massive one, 
the author believes it prudent to prepare for the worst 
possible attack. So let us suppose that an enemy 
strikes U.S. missile sites and other U.S. military 
targets with about 40% of its approximately 10,000 
megatons of intercontinental nuclear weapons, with 
another 40% hitting American industries and cities 
with surface bursts. Most cities would be destroyed 
by warheads much smaller than 20 megatons. Such a 
massive attack could subject urban and suburban 
areas where some 140 million Americans live to blast 
effects sufficiently intense to destroy essentially all 
homes. Without well-supplied blast shelters, most 

urban Americans who would have remained in their 
cities would be killed by blast, fire, and very heavy 
fallout. Most Americans would greatly improve their 
chances of surviving a nuclear attack if they were to 
evacuate probable target areas before an attack and 
make or improve fallout shelters in dispersed 
locations outside these most threatened areas. 

• Myth: So much food and water will be poisoned 
by fallout that people will starve and die even in 
fallout areas where there is enough food and water. 

© Facts: If the fallout particles do not become 
mixed with the parts of food that are eaten, no harm 
is done. Food and water in dust-tight containers are 
not contaminated by fallout radiation. Peeling fruits 
and vegetables removes essentially all fallout, as does 
removing the uppermost several inches of stored 
grain onto which fallout particles have fallen. Water 
from many sources—such as deep wells and covered 
reservoirs, tanks, and containers—would not be 
contaminated. Even water containing dissolved 
radioactive elements and compounds can be made 
safe for drinking by simply filtering it through earth, 
as described later in this book. 

® Myth: Most of the unborn children and 
grandchildren of people who have been exposed to 
radiation from nuclear explosions will be genetically 
damaged—will be malformed, delayed victims of 
nuclear war. 

• Facts: The authoritative study by the National 
Academy of Sciences, A Thirty Year Study of the 
Survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was published 
in 1977. It concludes that the incidence of abnor- 
malities is no higher among children later conceived 
by parents who were exposed to radiation during the 
attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki than is the 
incidence of abnormalities among Japanese children 
born to unexposed parents. 

This is not to say that there would be no genetic 
damage, nor that some fetuses subjected to large 
radiation doses would not be damaged. But the 
overwhelming evidence does show that the exag- 
gerated fears of radiation damage to future genera- 
tions are not supported by scientific findings. 

® Myth: Overkill would result if all the U.S. and 
U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons were used—meaning not 
only that the two superpowers have more than 
enough weapons to kill all of each other's people, but 
also that they have enough weapons to exterminate 
the human race. 

• Facts: Statements that the U.S. and the Soviet 
Union have the power to kill the world's population 
several times over are based on misleading calcula- 
tions. One such calculation is to multiply the deaths 
produced per kiloton exploded over Hiroshima or 
Nagasaki by an estimate of the number of kilotons in 
either side's arsenal. (A kiloton explosion is one that 
produces the same amount of energy as does 1000 
tons of TNT.) The unstated assumption is that 

somehow the world's population could be gathered 
into circular crowds, each a few miles in diameter 
with a population density equal to downtown 
Hiroshima or Nagasaki, and then a small (Hi- 
roshima-sized) weapon would be exploded over the 
center of each crowd. Other misleading calculations 
are based on exaggerations of the dangers from long- 
lasting radiation and other harmful effects of a 
nuclear war. 

Chapter 2 
Psychological Preparations 

LEARNING WHAT TO EXPECT 

The more one knows about the strange and 
fearful dangers from nuclear weapons and about the 
strengths and weaknesses of human beings when 
confronted with the dangers of war, the better chance 
one has of surviving. Terror, a self-destructive 
emotion, is almost always the result of unexpected 
danger. Some people would think the end of the 
world was upon them if they happened to be in an 
area downwind from surface bursts of nuclear 
weapons that sucked million's of tons of pulverized 
earth into the air. They might give up all hope if they 
did not understand what they saw. People are more 
likely to endure and survive if they learn in advance 
that such huge dust clouds, particularly if combined 
with smoke from great fires, may turn day into 
night—as have some volcanic eruptions and the 
largest forest fires. 

People also should expect thunder to crash in 
strange clouds, and the earth to shake. The sky may 
be lit with the flickering purples and greens of 
"artificial auroras" caused by nuclear explosions, 
especially those that are miles above the earth. 

FEAR 

Fear often is a life-saving emotion. When we 
believe death is close at hand, fear can increase our 
ability to work harder and longer. Driven by fear, we 
can accomplish feats that would be impossible 
otherwise. Trembling hands, weak legs, and cold 
sweat do not mean that a person has become 
ineffective. Doing hard, necessary work is one of the 
best ways to keep one's fears under control. 

Brave men and women who are self-confident 
admit their fears, even when the threat of death is 
remote. Then they plan and work to lessen the causes 

of their fears. (When the author helped Charles A. 
Lindbergh design a reinforced-concrete blast shelter 
for his family and neighbors, Lindbergh frankly- 
admitted that he feared both nuclear attack and being 
trapped. He was able to lessen both of these fears by 
building an excellent blast shelter with two escape 
openings.) 

TERROR 

If the danger is unexpected enough or great 
enough, normal persons sometimes experience terror 
as well as fear. Terror prevents the mind from 
evaluating dangers and thinking logically. It develops 
in two stages, which have been described by Dr. Walo 
von Gregerz, a physician with much war experience, 
in his book Psychology of Survival. The first stage is 
apathy: people become indifferent to their own safety 
and are unable even to try to save themselves or their 
families. The second stage is a compulsion to flee. 

Anxiety, fear, and terror can result in symptoms 
very similar to those caused by radiation injury: 
nausea, vomiting, extreme trembling, diarrhea. Dr. 
von Gregerz has described terror as being "explo- 
sively contagious." However, persons who learn to 
understand the nature of our inherent human traits 
and behavior and symptoms are less likely to become 
terrorized and ineffective in the event of a nuclear 
attack. 

EMOTIONAL PARALYSIS 

The most common reaction to great danger is 
not terror, but a kind of numbing of the emotions 
which actually may be helpful. Dr. von Gregerz calls 
this "emotional paralysis. "This reaction allows many 
persons, when in the grip of great danger, to avoid 
being overwhelmed by compassionate emotions and 

Preceding page blank 

13 

14 

horrible sights. It permits them to think clearly and 
act effectively. 

after the atomic bomb attacks, just as they were after 
the large-scale conventional bombings." 

ATOM BOMB SURVIVORS 

The atomic explosions that destroyed most of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki were air bursts and 
therefore produced no deadly local fallout. So we 
cannot be sure how people would behave in areas 
subjected to both blast and fallout from surface 
bursts. However, the reactions of the Japanese 
survivors are encouraging, especially in view of the 
fact that among them the relative number of horribly 
burned people was greater than is likely to be found 
among a population that expects a nuclear attack and 
takes any sort of shelter. Dr. von Gregerz summa- 
rizes: "In most cases the victims were, of course, 
apathetic and often incapable of rational action, but 
open panic or extremely disorganized behavior 
occurred only in exceptional cases among the 
hundreds of thousands of survivors of the two atomic 
bombing attacks." Also encouraging: ". .. serious 
permanent psychological derangements were rare 

HELP FROM FELLOW AMERICANS 

Some maintain that after an atomic attack 
America would degenerate into anarchy—an every- 
man-for-himself struggle for existence. They forget 
the history of great human catastrophes and the self- 
sacrificing strengths most human beings are capable 
of displaying. After a massive nuclear attack 
starvation would afflict some areas, but America's 
grain-producing regions still would have an abun- 
dance of uncontaminated food. History indicates 
that Americans in the food-rich areas would help the 
starving. Like the heroic Russians who drove food 
trucks to starving Leningrad through bursting Nazi 
bombs and shells,7 many Americans would risk 
radiation and other dangers to bring truckloads of 
grain and other necessities to their starving country- 
men. Surely, an essential part of psychological 
preparations for surviving a modern war is a well- 
founded assurance that many citizens of a strong 
society will struggle to help each other and will work 
together with little regard for danger and loss. 

Chapter 3 

Warnings and Communications 

IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE WARNING 

When Hiroshima and Nagasaki were blasted by 
the first nuclear weapons ever to be used in war, very 
few of the tens of thousands of Japanese killed or 
injured were inside their numerous air raid shelters. 
The single-plane attacks caught them by surprise. 
People are not saved by having shelters nearby unless 
they receive warning in time to reach their shelters— 
and unless they heed that warning. 

TYPES OF WARNINGS 

Warnings are of two types, strategic and tactical. 

® Strategic warning is based on observed enemy 
actions that are believed to be preparations for an 
attack. For example, we would have strategic 
warning if powerful Russian armies were advancing 
into western Europe and Soviet leaders were 
threatening massive nuclear destruction if the 
resisting nations should begin to use tactical nuclear 
weapons. With strategic warning being given by news 
broadcasts and newspapers over a period of days, 
Americans in areas that are probably targeted would 
have time to evacuate. Given a day or more of 
warning, tens of millions of us could build or improve 
shelters and in other ways improve our chances of 
surviving the feared attack. By doing so, we also 
would help decrease the risk of attack. 

• Tactical warning of a nuclear attack on the 
United States would be received by our highest 
officials a few minutes after missiles or other nuclear 
weapons had been launched against our country. 
Radar, satellites, and other sophisticated means of 
detection would begin to feed information into our 
military warning systems almost at once. This raw 

information would have to be evaluated, and top- 
level decisions would have to be made. Then attack 
warnings would have to be transmitted down to com- 
munities all over America. 

Tactical warning (attack warning) of an out-of- 
the-blue, Pearl-Harbor-type attack would be less 
likely to be received by the average American than 
would an attack warning given after recognized 
strategic warning. However, the short time (only 20 
to 40 minutes) that would elapse between missile 
launchings and the resultant first explosions on 
targets in the United States would make it difficult 
for even an excellent warning system to alert the 
majority of Americans in time for them to reach the 
best available nearby shelter. 

Strengths and weaknesses of the present official 
warning system are summarized in the following two 
sections. Then the life-saving warnings that the first 
nuclear explosions would give, especially to informed 
people, are described. 

OFFICIAL WARNING SYSTEM 

The U.S. official warning system is designed to 
give civilians timely warning by means of siren signals 
and radio and television announcements. The 
National Warning System (NAWAS) is a wire-line 
network which is to provide attack information to 
official warning points nationwide. When the 
information is received at warning points by the 
officials who are responsible, they will sound local 
sirens and initiate radio and TV emergency broad- 
casts—if power has not failed. Officials at NAWAS 
warning points include many local civil defense 
directors. NAWAS receives information from our 

15 

constantly improving military warning and commu- 
nications systems. 

SIREN WARNINGS 

The Attack Warning Signal is a wavering, 
wailing sound on the sirens lasting three to five 
minutes, or a series of short blasts on whistles or 
horns. After a brief pause, it is repeated. This signal 
means only one thing: take protective action—go 
promptly to the best available shelter. Do not try to 
telephone for information; get information from a 
radio broadcast after you reach shelter. It is Federal 
policy that the Attack Warning Signal will not be 
sounded unless an enemy attack on the United States 
has been detected. However, since local authorities 
may not follow this policy, the reader is advised to 
check the plans in his community before a crisis 
arises. 

The following limitations of attack warnings 
given by sirens and broadcasting stations should be 
recognized: 

® Only a relatively small fraction of urban 
Americans could hear the sirens in the present city 
systems, especially if most urban citizens had 
evacuated during a crisis. 

® Except in a crisis threatening the outbreak of 
nuclear war at any moment, most people who would 
hear the attack warning signal either would not 
recognize it or would not believe it was a warning of 
actual attack. 

• A coordinated enemy attack may include the 
detonation of a few submarine-launched ballistic 
missiles (SLBMs) at high altitudes over the United 
States within two or three minutes of the launching of 
hundreds of SLBMs and intercontinental ballistic 
missiles (ICBMs). Such high-altitude bursts would 
produce electromagnetic pulse (EM P) effects primar- 
ily intended to knock out or disrupt U.S. military 
communications. These EMP effects also could 
knock out the public power necessary to sound sirens 
and could put most unprotected broadcasting 
stations off the air. 

Radio warnings and emergency communica- 
tions to the general public will be broadcast by the 
Emergency Broadcast System (EBS). This system 
uses AM broadcasting stations as the primary means 
to reach the public; selected FM and TV stations are 
included for backup. All stations during a crisis plan 
to use their normal broadcast frequencies. 

EBS stations that are not put off the air by EMP 
or other effects of early explosions will attempt to 
confirm the siren warnings of a nuclear attack. They 
will try to give information to listeners in the 
extensive areas where sirens and whistles cannot be 
heard. However, EMP effects on telephones may 
limit the information available to the stations. The 
functioning EBS stations should be able to warn 
listeners to seek the best available nearby shelter in 
time for most of these listeners to reach such shelter 
before ICBMs begin to explode. Limitations of the 
Emergency Broadcasting System in 1979 include the 
fact that very few civilian radio stations are protected 
against EMP effects. Many of the protected stations 
would be knocked out by blast; most do not afford 
their operating personnel fallout protection that is 
adequate for continuing broadcasts for long in areas 
subjected to heavy fallout. 

WARNINGS GIVEN BY 
THE ATTACK ITSELF 

The great majority of Americans would not be 
injured by the first explosions of a nuclear attack. In 
an all-out attack, the early explosions would give 
sufficient warning for most people to reach nearby 
shelter in time, Fifteen minutes or more before big 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) blasted 
our cities, missile sites, and other extensive areas, 
most citizens would see the sky lit up to an 
astounding brightness, would hear the thunderous 
sounds of distant explosions, or would note the 
sudden outage of electric power and most communi- 
cations. These reliable attack warnings would result 
from the explosion of submarine-launched ballistic 
missiles (SLBMs). These are smaller than many 
ICBMs. The SLBM warheads would explode on 
Strategic Air Command bases and on many civilian 
airport runways that are long enough to be used by 
our big bombers. Some naval bases and high-priority 
military command and communication centers 
would also be targeted. 

The vast majority of Americans do not know 
how to use these warnings from explosions to help 
them save their lives. Neither are they informed about 
the probable strategies of an enemy nuclear attack. 

One of the first objectives of a coordinated 
enemy attack would be to destroy our long-range 
bombers, because each surviving U.S. bomber would 
be one of our most deadly retaliatory weapons. Once 
bombers are airborne and well away from their 
runways, they are difficult to destroy. To destroy our 

bombers before they could getaway, the first SLBMs 
would be launched at the same time that ICBMs 
would be fired from their silos in Europe and Asia. 
U.S. surveillance systems would detect launchings 
and transmit warnings within a very few minutes. 
Since some enemy submarines would be only a few 
hundred miles from their targets, some SLBMs 
would explode on American targets about 15 or 20 
minutes before the first ICBMs would hit. * 

Some SLBMs would strike civilian airport 
runways that are at least 7000 ft long. This is the 
minimum length required by B-52s; there were 210 
such runways in the U.S. in 1977. During a crisis, big 
bombers would be dispersed to many of these long 
runways, and enemy SLBMs would be likely to target 
and hit these runways in an effort to destroy the 
maximum number of bombers. 

Unlike the more numerous, small, multiple 
warheads of most U.S. SLBMs, most Soviet SLBMs 
produce a megaton-range explosion. Within the first 
10 minutes after the beginning of an attack, many 
runways 7000 feet or longer are likely to be cratered 
by a 1-megaton surface burst. Therefore, homes 
within about 4 miles of a runway at least 7000 ft long 
are likely to be destroyed before residents receive 
warning or have time to reach blast shelters away 
from their homes. Homes six miles away could be 
lightly damaged by such a warhead, with the blast 
wave arriving about 22 seconds after the warning 
light. Some windows would be broken 40 miles away. 
But the large majority of citizens would not be 
injured by these early SLBM attacks. These ex- 
plosions would be life-saving "take cover" warnings 
to most Americans, if they have been properly 
informed. 

Sudden power and communications failures 
caused by the electromagnetic pulse (EM P) effects of 
nuclear explosions also could serve as attack 
warnings in extensive areas. An EMP is an intense 
burst of radio-frequency radiation generated by a 
nuclear explosion. The strong, quick-rising surges of 
electric current induced by EMP in power trans- 
mission lines and long antennas could burn out most 
unprotected electrical and electronic equipment. 

The usual means of protecting electrical equip- 
ment against surges of current produced by lightning 
are generally ineffective against EM P. The protective 
measures are known, but to date all too few civilian 
installations have been protected against EM P 
effects. Three or four nuclear weapons skillfully 
spaced and detonated at high altitudes over the 

United States would produce EM P effects that might 
knock out most public power, most radio and TV 
broadcasting stations lacking special protection 
against these effects, and most radios connected to 
long antennas. Nuclear explosions on or near the 
ground may produce damaging EMP effects over 
areas somewhat larger than those in which such 
equipment and buildings would be damaged by the 
blast effects. 

HOW TO RESPOND TO UNEXPECTED 
ATTACK WARNINGS 

Although a Pearl-Harbor-type of attack is 
unlikely, citizens should be prepared to respond 
effectively to unexpected warnings. 
These warnings include: 

• Extremely bright lights—more light than has 
been seen before. The dazzling, bright lights of the 
first SLBM explosions on targets in many parts of the 
United States would be seen by most Americans. One 
should not look to determine the source of light and 
heat, because there is danger of the viewer's eyes 
being damaged by the heat and light from a large 
explosion at distances as far as a hundred miles away, 
in clear weather. Look down and away from the 
probable source, and quickly get behind anything 
that will shield you from most of the thermal pulse's 
burning heat and intense light. A thermal pulse 
delivers its heat and light for several seconds—for 
more than 11 seconds if it is from a 1 -megaton surface 
burst and for approximately 44 seconds if from a 20- 
megaton surface burst. 

If you are at home when you see the amazingly 
bright light, run out of rooms with windows. Hurry 
to a windowless hallway or down into the basement. 
If you have a shelter close to your house, but separate 
from it, do not leave the best cover in your home to 
run outdoors to reach the shelter; wait until about 
two minutes after first seeing the light. 

If outdoors when you see the bright light, get 

behind the best available cover. 

It would be impossible to estimate the distance 
to an explosion from its light or appearance, so you 
should stay under cover for about two minutes. A 
blast wave initially travels much faster than the 
normal speed of sound (about 1 mile in 5 seconds). 
But by the time its overpressure has decreased to 1 
pound per square inch (psi), a blast wave and its 
thunderous sound have slowed down and are moving 
only about 3% faster than the normal speed of sound. 

If no blast or sound reaches you in two minutes, 
you would know that the explosion was over 25 miles 
away and you would not be hurt by blast effects, 
unless cut by shattered window glass. After two 
minutes you can safely leave the best cover in your 
home and get a radio. Turn the dial to the stations to 
which you normally listen and try to find informa- 
tion. Meanwhile, quickly make preparations to go to 
the best shelter you and your family can reach within 
15 minutes—the probable time interval before the 
first ICBMs start to explode. 

At no time after an attack begins should you 
look out of a window or stay near a window. Under 
certain atmospheric conditions, windows can be 
shattered by a multimegaton explosion a hundred 
miles away. 

© The sound of explosions. The thunderous 
booms of the initial SLBM explosions would be 
heard over almost all parts of the United States. 
Persons one hundred miles away from a nuclear 
explosion may receive their first warning by hearing 
it about lx\i minutes later. Most would have time to 
reach nearby shelter before the ICBMs begin to 
explode. 

® Loss of electric power and communications. If 
the lights go out and you find that many radio and TV 
stations are suddenly off the air, continue to dial if 
you have a battery-powered radio, and try to find a 
station that is still broadcasting. 

HOW TO RESPOND TO ATTACK WARNINGS 
DURING A WORSENING CRISIS 

If an attack takes place during a worsening crisis, 
the effectiveness of warnings would be greater. Even 
if our government did not order an evacuation of 
high-risk areas, millions of Americans would already 
have moved to safer areas if they had learned that the 
enemy's urban civilians were evacuating or that 
tactical nuclear weapons were being employed over- 
seas. Many prudent citizens would sleep inside the 
best available shelter and stay in or near shelter most 
of their waking hours. Many people would have 
made or improved family or small-group shelters and 
would have supplied them with most essentials. The 
official warning systems would have been fully 
alerted and improved. 

During such a tense crisis period, neighbors 
or people sheltered near each other should have 
someone listen to radio stations at all times of the 
day and night. If the situation worsened or an attack 

warning were broadcast, the listener could alert the 
others. 

One disadvantage of waiting to build expedient 
shelters until there is a crisis is that many of the 
builders are likely to be outdoors improving their 
shelters when the first SLBMs are launched. The 
SLBM warheads may arrive so soon that the civilian 
warning systems cannot respond in time. To reduce 
the risk of being burned, persons working outdoors 
when expecting an attack should wear shirts, hats, 
and gloves. They should jump into a shelter or behind 
a nearby shielding object at the first warning, which 
may be the sudden cut-off of some radio 
broadcasts. 

REMAINING INSIDE SHELTER 

Curiosity and ignorance probably will cause 
many people to come out of shelters a few hours after 
an attack warning, if no blast or obvious fallout has 
endangered their area. This is dangerous, because 
several hours after almost all missiles have been 
launched the first enemy bombers may strike. Cities 
and other targets that have been spared because 
missiles malfunctioned or missed are likely to be 
destroyed by nuclear bombs dropped during the first 
several days after the first attack. 

Most people should stay inside their shelters for 
at least two or three days, even if they are in a locality 
far from a probable target and even if fallout meter 
readings prove there is no dangerous fallout. 
Exceptions would include some of the people who 
would need to improve shelters or move to better 
shelters. Such persons could do so at relatively small 
risk during the interval between the ICBM explosions 
and the arrival of enemy bombers and/or the start of 
fallout deposition a few hours, later. 

Fallout would cover most of the United States 
within 12 hours after a massive attack. In such 
dangerous areas, people in shelters could rarely 
depend on information received from distant radio 
stations regarding changing fallout dangers and 
advising when and for how long they could go out- 
side their shelters. Weather conditions such as wind 
speed would cause fallout dangers to vary with 
distance. If not forced by thirst or hunger to leave 
shelter, they should depend on their own fallout 
meter readings or on radiation measurements made 
by neighbors or local civil defense workers. 

HOW TO KEEP RADIOS OPERATING 

Having a radio to receive emergency broadcasts 
would be a great advantage. The stations that would 
still be on the air after an attack would probably be 
too distant from most survivors to give them reliable 
information concerning local, constantly changing 
fallout dangers. However, both morale and the 
prospects of long-range survival would be improved 
in shelters with a radio bringing word of the large- 
area fallout situation, food-relief measures, practical 
survival skills, and what the government and other 
organizations were doing to help. Radio contact with 
the outside world probably can be maintained after 
an attack if you remember to: 

• Bring all of.your family's battery-powered, 
portable radios with you to shelter, along with all 
fresh batteries on hand. 

• Protect AM radios by using only their built-in 
short loop antennas. The built-in antennas of small 
portable radios are too short for EMP to induce 
damaging surges of current in them. 

• Keep antennas of FM, CB, and amateur radios 
as short as practical, preferably less than 10 inches. 
When threatened by EMP, a danger that may con- 
tinue for weeks after the initial attack because of 
repeated, high-altitude explosions, do not add a wire 
antenna or connect a short radio antenna to a pipe. 
Remember that a surge of current resulting from 
EMP especially can damage diodes and transistors, 
thus ending a radio's usefulness or reducing its range 
of reception. 

• Keep all unshielded radios at least six feet away 
from any long piece of metal, such as pipes, metal 
ducts, or wires found in many basements and other 

19 

shelters. Long metal conductors can pick up and 
carry large EMP surges, causing induced current 
to surge in nearby radios and damage them. 

• Shield each radio against EMP when not in use 
by completely surrounding it with conducting metal 
if it is kept within six feet of a long conductor through 
which powerful currents produced by EMP might 
surge. A radio may be shielded against EMP by 
placing it inside a metal cake box or metal storage 
can, or by completely surrounding it with aluminum 
foil or metallic window screen. 

• Disconnect the antenna cable of your car radio 
at the receiver—or at least ground the antenna when 
not in use by connecting it with a wire to the car 
frame. Use tape or clothespins to assure good metal- 
to-metal contact. The metal of an outside mirror is 
a convenient grounding-point. Park your car as near 
to your shelter as practical, so that after fallout 
has decayed sufficiently you may be able to use 
the car radio to get distant stations that are still 
broadcasting. 

• Prevent possible damage to a radio from ex- 
treme dampness (which may result from long 
occupancy of some belowground shelters) by keep- 
ing it sealed in a clear plastic bag large enough so 
the radio can be operated while inside. An additional 
precaution is to keep a plastic-covered radio in an 
air-tight container with some anhydrite made from 
wallboard gypsum, as described in Appendix C. 

• Conserve batteries, because after an attack you 
may not be able to get replacements for months. 
Listen only periodically, to the stations you find give 
the most useful information. The batteries of 
transistor radios will last up to twice as long if the 
radios are played at reduced volume. 

Chapter 4 

Evacuation 

HIGHEST-RISK AND HIGH-RISK 
AREAS OF THE U.S. 

The Soviet Union,could deliver with increasing 
accuracy several thousand nuclear warheads and 
bombs on targets in the United States. Thesesteadily 
improved weapons have at least 3 times the explosive 
power of all U.S. intercontinental weapons and 
therefore could produce 3 times as much fallout. If 
a massive all-out attack were launched, all important 
military installations, areas around airport runways 
longer than 7000 feet, and cities would be endangered 
by blast and fire. Much larger areas would receive 
fallout so heavy that persons would need to be inside 
good shelters to survive. 

In response to these dangers, thoughtful Ameri- 
cans living in the highest-risk and high-risk areas 
should decide whether they would evacuate if, in 
a worsening crisis, the Soviets were to begin to 
evacuate their cities. The map on the following page 
(see .1 and its caption) shows highest-risk 
and high-risk fallout areas in the United States that 
might result from an attack delivering 6600 
megatons, including 113 surface bursts of 20 
megatons each on urban and industrial targets and 
a total of 3190 megatons surface burst on military 
targets. (The remaining 1150 megatons are air bursts; 
air bursts produce practically no local fallout.) 

In regard to dangers from fallout radiation, 
highest-risk areas are those where a radiation dose 
of 10,000 R or more would be received by a person 
who remained outdoors continuously for the first 
two weeks. As will be explained later, to survive 
in such areas people would have to stay inside very 
good shelters for several weeks, or, after two weeks 
or more, leave very good shelters and drive in a few 
hours to an area relatively free of fallout dangers. A 

"very good" fallout shelter is one that reduces the 
radiation dose received by its occupants to less than 
1/200th of the dose they would have received 
outdoors during the same period. If the two-week 
dose outdoors were 20,000 R, such a shelter with a 
protection factor of 200 (PF 200) wouldprevent each 
occupant from receiving a dose greater than 
100 R—not enough to incapacitate. Even a com- 
pletely belowground home basement, unless greatly 
improved as described in Chapter 5, would give 
entirely inadequate protection. 

High-risk fallout areas are those where the two- 
week dose outdoors is between 5,000 and 10,000 R. 
In such areas, good fallout shelters would be 
essential, supplied at least with adequate water and 
baby food for two weeks. Furthermore, survivors 
would have to remain inside shelters for most of 
each day for several additional weeks. 

The radiation dangers in the shaded areas of the 
map are shown decreasing as the distances from the 
explosions increase. This generally is the case, 
although sometimes rain or snow carries radioactive 
particles to the ground, producing "rainouts" of 
exceptionally heavy fallout farther downwind. 
Furthermore, this computer-drawn map made at 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory does not indicate 
the very dangerous fallout near the isolated surface 
bursts. Although the most dangerous fallout would 
be carried by high-altitude winds that usually blow 
from west to east, such simplified fallout patterns 
as those shown should be used only as rough guides 
to help improve chances of evacuating a probable 
blast area or very heavy fallout area and going to 
a less dangerous area. Wind directions are unde- 
pendable; an enemy's targeting can be unexpected; 
weapons can miss. A prudent citizen, no matter 

Preceding page blank 

21 

22 

E 
O 
O 
O 
O* 
eg 

e 
o 
o 
I 
CO >- 

CM 

D ©. 
1 o 
_J «- 
2 ISB9 

O 
o 
o 
©* 

o 
Iß 

O 
O 
o 
w 

o 
10 
CM 

O 
O 
m 
CM 
i 
in 

o 
in 

i 

P 

O 
O 
O 
o" 
CM 

E 
O 
O 
1 A 
o A 
D 

c 
o 
00 
en w 
ta- 
C w 
ts 
O _ 
o „, 
w £> 
1) £ 
O. ** 

w 

•a 
> 
"J3 
u 
68 
5 u 
■ E 
4» © 
•a © 
3 -n 
o 

«-* 
es 
J5- 

3 

u 
u 

O 
•o 
C' "C 
O 3 
2 <* 
re O 
■a 
es 

E 

u 
•£ 
E 
o 

6B XT' 

*■» 

o O 3 
C 
n £ w 
be 
n 
is >> 
o 
o 
BS •o 
£ 
IA •*■ u 
a> ~* X) 
u 
C 
IA c 
IM 
U 
*-» 
o 
"*—■ c 
a; *- 
m 
CO > 
D. 
4M» 
3 
O 

£ c * 
"O Q. cd 
,S o » 

"H.-5 .S 
E B * 
W £ .g 
. C *■' 
"■ * Vi 
*■ 1 ^ 
E 3 g 
u -a 
x c 

where he is, should try to build a shelter that gives 
excellent protection against fallout radiation. 

Risk-area maps based primarily on blast dangers 
(see .2 and its caption) have been used ex- 
tensively in planning urban evacuations and deciding 
what kind of shelters are needed in different 
communities. Note that the risk areas shown in 
.2 are smaller than the risk areas from fallout 
indicated in .1. A major disadvantage of all 
types of risk-area maps is the fact that poorly 
informed people often misinterpret them and con- 
clude that if they are outside a mapped risk area, they 
are relatively safe from both blast and fallout 
dangers. 

Another reason for not placing much reliance 
on risk-area maps such as .1 and .2 is that 
such available maps are based on the largest attacks 
that were considered possible several years ago. In 
the past few years the number of warheads and 
bombs that could strike the United States has in- 
creased greatly, although their total megatonage and 
capability to produce fallout have not. As a result, 
in 1979 many more targets in the United States might 
be hit than are indicated in .1 or .2, and the 
areas that could be free of fallout probably would be 
less extensive. 

The areas of highest risk from blast and fire 
would be intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) 
sites, such as those around Great Falls, Montana and 
Tucson, Arizona. The surface-bursting of many large 
weapons on such sites would produce highest-risk 
fallout areas for a hundred miles downwind. In an 
all-out war, our largest cities also would be highest- 
risk areas. Several multi-megaton weapons would be 
needed to destroy each of these large urban and 
industrial areas. The areas near Strategic Air 
Command bases and Navy submarine bases are 
highest-risk areas, although smaller weapons would 
be adequate to destroy these targets. 

High-risk areas would include major ports, run- 
ways over 7000 feet in length, and important aircraft 
and munitions factories. Less important cities, large 
oil refineries, steel mills, and the largest dams also 
would be high-risk areas, with heavy fallout to be 
expected downwind for a hundred miles or so. 

23 

were beginning to be used in what had been an 
overseas conventional war involving the United 
States. In such a worsening crisis, most Americans 
could improve their survival chances by getting out 
of highest-risk and high-risk areas. Within a few 
years, the high-risk areas could include as many as 
600 cities of more than 25,000 inhabitants. Similar- 
sized concentrations of urban evacuees might also 
become targets if the number of nuclear weapons 
continues to increase. 

Persons who decide to evacuate from a highest- 
risk area should try to go at least 40 miles from the 
nearest probable aiming point for a large ICBM, such 
as the center of a big city. Even if several accurately 
delivered, large weapons were to destroy such a city, 
40 miles away from its center should be far enough 
to avoid blast dangers, except possibly from flying, 
broken glass.6 

If you are evacuating a high-risk area such as 
an average city or a location near an airfield or major 
factory, 20 miles from the anticipated ground zero 
should be the minimum distance to avoid most blast 
dangers. 

Which way and how far one should go to reduce 
probable fallout dangers are more difficult questions 
to answer. Going westward, up-wind from the high- 
risk area relative to the generally west-to-east winds 
at high altitudes, usually would be most promising; 
next, going north or south. But if going in these 
generally favorable directions would result in moving 
into another high-risk area, or if these routes v.;ere 
to be blocked by a large body of water, then one> 
would have to decide whether it would be practical to ! 
evacuate to a more distant area. 

Studies of crisis relocation planning by the 
Defense Civil Preparedness Agency may result in 
official preparations to evacuate most urban citizens 
on the President's orders. If pre-crisis preparations 
for the movement, control, feeding, and health care 
of about 100 million Americans were to be completed 
and put into effect during a crisis, the decisions for 
those living in high-risk areas would be simplified. 
Also, the chances of surviving would be improved. 

WHETHER TO EVACUATE 

Let's assume that cities of an enemy nation were 
being evacuated or that tactical nuclear weapons 

Whether or not such preparations are made, the 
following considerations may help you and your 
family make a more logical decision regarding 
evacuation: 

24 

es 5 tj ~ 
c 
o 
Eu 
•o 
I * 
V 
a 
.a js 
c <—- 
•a w 
£ o 

■ <« >- 

—' 3 
C .O 

43 «a 
? u 

U > 
0 

3 

<U> I« W 
£ J= u 
<- (ii *- 
a 
o 
>> 
o 

c 
o 
c. 

CO 

A! 
CO 

-o 
c 

o 
c 

00 jD 

00 
CS 
E 

C3 

O 

j= 
oo 
a 
o 

M a 
£ o 
> a. 

O 
u 
C8 

& 
M I 
En 
ca 
u 

c <- 
D en 
60 cd 
< S 
■» «a 

c <~ 
TS O 

c 
o 
u 

00 

u 

C3 

I 1 

3 
O 

4) 
en 
C 

Q 
< 

C 
o 
« 
00 
£ 
o 
er S 

U 
>1 
ca « 
u 3 

u —r 
Q, CS 
o -a w 
3 >, e 
3 u 
n 
O o 
a) 42 n. x: 
O, u 
u 
o o m c 
»* w 
m 
o a 
t/: 

1 

25 

Favorable to Evacuation: 

Unfavorable to Evacuation: 

* You live in a highest-risk or high-risk 
area. 

* You have transportation (this means a car 
and enough gasoline), and roads are open to a 
considerably lower-risk area. 

* You are in fairly good health or can 
evacuate with someone capable of taking care of 
you. 

* Your work is not of the kind that your 
community depends on (such as a policeman, fire- 
man, or telephone operator). 

* You have some tools with which to build or im- 
prove a fallout shelter. You also have water con- 
tainers, food, clothing, etc., adequate for life in the 
area to which you would go. 

* You live outside a highest-risk or high-risk 
area and could build an expedient fallout shelter 
and make other survival preparations where you 
live. 

* You have no means of transportation or 
you believe that roads are likely to be blocked 
by the time you make your decision. 

* You are sick, decrepit, or lack the will to try 
to survive if things get tough. 

* You cannot suddenly leave your home area 
for several days without hurting others. 

* You lack the tools, etc., that would be 
helpful—but not necessarily essential—to success- 
ful evacuation. 

Instructions for building expedient fallout and 
blast shelters and for making expedient life-support 
equipment are: given in following chapters. The 
reader is advised:-to study all of this book carefully 
before making up his mind regarding basic survival 
action. 

THE NEED FOR AN 
EVACUATION CHECKLIST 

A good flyer, no matter how many years he has 
flown, runs through a checklist covering his plane 
before taking off. Similarly, a citizen preparing under 
crisis pressures to do something he has never done 
before—evacuate—should use a checklist to be sure 
that he takes with him the most useful of his available 
possessions. 

A family planning to use an expedient shelter or 
basement at or near home also should use the 
Evacuation Checklist to make sure needed survival 
items are not overlooked. 

The family of six pictured in .3 used the 
Evacuation Checklist given below to select the most 
useful things that could be carried in and on their 
small car. They assembled categories of items in 
separate piles, then selected some items to take with 
them from each pile. They were able to leave their 
home 76 minutes after receiving the Evacuation 
Checklist. (Following chapters of this book include 
descriptions of this family's success in evacuating, 
building a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter, and living in 
it continuously for 77 hours.) 

26 

EVACUATION CHECKLIST 

(Includes items for building or improving shelters) 

Loading Procedure: Make separate piles for 
each category (except categories 1 and 5). Then load 
the car with some items from each category, taking 
as much as can be safely carried and being careful 
to leave room for all passengers. 

A. THE MOST NEEDED ITEMS 

Category 1. Survival Information: Shelter-build- 
ing and other nuclear survival 
instructions, maps, all available 
small battery-powered radios and 
extra batteries, and a fallout meter 
such as a homemade KFM (see 
Appendix C). 

Category 2. Tools: Shovel, pick, saw (a bow- 
saw is best), ax or hatchet, file, knife, 
pliers, and any other tools specified 
in the building instructions for the 
shelter planned. Also take work 
gloves. 

Category 3. Shelter-Building Materials: Rain- 
proofing materials (plastic, shower 
curtains, cloth, etc.) as specified in 
the instructions for the type of 
shelter planned. Also, unless the 
weather is very cold, a homemade 
shelter-ventilating pump such as a 
KAP, or the materials to build one 
(see Appendix B). 

Category 4. Water: Small, filled containers plus 
all available large polyethylene trash 
bags, smaller plastic bags and pillow 
cases, water-purifying material such 
as Clorox, and a teaspoon for 
measuring. 

Category 5. Peacetime valuables: Money, credit 
cards, negotiable securities, valuable 
jewelry, checkbooks, and the most 
important documents kept at home. 

Category 6. Light: Flashlights, candles, mate- 
rials to improvise cooking-oil lamps 
(2 clear glass jars of about 1-pint 
size, cooking oil, cotton string for 
wicks (see Chapter 11, Light), 
kitchen matches, and a moisture- 
proof jar for storing matches. 

Category 7. Clothing: Cold-weather boots, over- 
shoes, and warm outdoor cloth- 
ing (even in summer, since after 
an attack these would be unobtain- 
able), raincoats and ponchos. Wear 
work clothes and work shoes. 

Category 8. Sleeping Gear: A compact sleeping 

bag or two blankets per person. 

Category 9. Food: Food for babies (including 
milk powder, cooking oil, and 
sugar) has the highest priority. 
Compact foods that require no 
cooking are preferred. Include at 
least one pound of salt, available 
vitamins, a can and bottle opener, 
for each person one cup, bowl, and 
large spoon, and 2 cooking pots 
with lids (4-qt size preferred). Also, 
minimum materials for making a 
bucket-stove: a metal bucket, 10 
all-wire coat hangers, a nail, and a 
cold chisel or screwdriver (see 
Chapter 9, Food). 

Category 10. Sanitation Items: Plastic film or 
plastic bags in which to collect and 
contain excrement; a bucket or 
plastic container for urine; toilet 
paper, tampons, diapers, and soap. 

Category 11. Medical Items: Aspirin, a first-aid 
kit, all available antibiotics and 
disinfectants, special prescription 
medicines (if essential to a member 
of the family), potassium iodide (for 
protection' against radioactive io- 
dine, see Chapter 13), spare eye- 
glasses, and contact lenses. 

Category 12. Miscellaneous: Two square yards 
of mosquito netting or insect screen 
with which to screen the shelter 
openings if insects are a problem, 
insect repellents, a favorite book or 
two. 

B. SOME USEFUL ITEMS (To take if car space is 

available): 

1. Additional tools. 

2. A tent, a small camp stove, and some 

additional kitchen utensils. 

-**r* 

rf*4:; 

"■»'.••;a» 

t * i ■■■- ■• f ■ 
* v/ ■ r ■■■• f 

::*^' 

;.v:. • ••■&*•■:■. 

■-■^^msäm 

.3. Six members of a Utah family arriving at a rural shelter-building site 64 miles from their 

urban home. 

EVACUATING BY CAR 

The small car shown in .3 was skillfully 
loaded for a safe evacuation trip. To make room for 
supplies, the back seat was left at home. The load 
on top of the car included blankets, a small rug, and 
a small tent—all made of springy materials which 
kept the load from becoming compacted and working 
loose under the ropes tightened around it. The two 
loop-ended ropes went over the load and around the 
top of the car, passing over the tops of the closed 
doors. 

USING MUSCLE POWER 

Hazards of evacuation would include highways 
blocked by wrecks and stalled vehicles. If leadership, 
and know-how were provided, the muscle power 
of people usually could quickly clear a highway. 
During a major Chinese evacuation before advancing 
Japanese armies in World War II, I observed 
Chinese, using only muscle power, quickly clear 
a mountain road of wrecks and other obstructions. 
Americans can do the same, if someone convinces 

them that they can do it, as proved by a wintertime 
episode on Monarch Pass over the Continental 
Divide in Colorado. At least 100 vehicles were held 
up after a large wrecking truck overturned on the 
icy highway. The patrolmen were doing nothing until 
I told them how the Chinese handled such a situation. 
The patrolmen then called for volunteers from 
among the delayed motorists to lift the overturned 
truck back onto its wheels. In less than 15 minutes, 
about 50 people had combined their muscle power 
and opened Monarch Pass to traffic. 

Citizens should take direct action to keep traffic 

moving during a crisis evacuation. 

MAKING AN EXPEDIENT BLAST- 
PROTECTIVE SHELTER INSTEAD OF 
EVACUATING 

Millions of Americans have homes within very 
large urban-industrial areas that probably would be 
subjected to blast and fire dangers. Many who live 
in the suburbs or adjacent towns in these metro- 
politan areas may find that their best survival strategy 

28 

is not to evacuate, but to build expedient earth- 
covered shelters at or very near their homes and to 
supply them with life-support essentials. This is a 
good idea, provided that (1) their homes are far 
enough away from probable aiming points to make 
such shelters practical, and (2) enough time, space, 
tools, materials, and supplies are available. 

Consider the blast dangers from a 20-megaton 
surface burst and the effectiveness of expedient 
shelters for protection against blast. Wood frame 
buildings at the least would be severely damaged 
(usually collapsed) within about 10 miles from 
ground zero. This and worse destruction would re- 
suit over a roughly circular area of approximately 
315 square miles. In comparison, as has been 
indicated by test explosions conducted by Defense 
Nuclear Agency,5 earth-covered expedient fallout 
shelters roofed with hollow-core interior doors would 
be undamaged if about 7.5 miles or more from 
ground zero of a 20-MT surface burst. 

(Fallout shelters are designed for protection 
against radiation from fallout particles. Although 
fallout shelters lack blast doors and other means for 
keeping out blast, the better types would prevent their 
occupants from being killed by blast effects in ex- 
tensive areas where people in houses would have little 
chance of surviving. In this book, an "expedient 
means an expedient fallout 
shelter" generally 
shelter.) 

Persons who were farther than about four miles 
from ground zero of a 20-MT surface burst would 
survive in expedient or permanent blast shelters 
designed to give excellent protection against all blast, 
fire, and radiation effects where the overpressure is 
no higher than 15 psi. Thus 15-psi blast shelters 
would reduce the area of probable death to about 50 
square miles—an 88% reduction. (See Appendix D, 
Expedient Blast Shelters.) 

The photo (.4) shows a family with no 
adult male that built an expedient shelter that would 
give far better fallout, blast, and fire protection than 
almost any home. They succeeded, despite the 
necessity of working on cold November days with 
snow flurries. The top two inches of earth were frozen 
and the next two feet so dry that, most of it had to be 
loosened with their dull pick. No member of this 
family had done any serious digging before, yet they 

.4. This family completed a Door- 
Covered Trench Shelter 34 hours after receiving the 
building instructions at their home. 

built a shelter that would have given about 100 times 
as much protection against fallout radiation as would 
a typical small frame house and at least 25 times as 
much as a typical home basement. 

In many areas, this and even better types of 
expedient fallout shelters affording considerable 
bläst protection could be built by untrained families, 
following the written, field-tested instructions in 
this book. Furthermore, as shown in Appendix D, 
Expedient Blast Shelters, within a few days a small 
but significant fraction of the population could build 
expedient blast shelters complete with expedient 
blast doors and providing at least 15-psi blast 
protection. 

Chapter 5 
Shelter, the Greatest Need 

ADEQUATE SHELTER 

To improve your chances of surviving a nuclear 
attack, your primary need would be an adequate 
shelter equipped for many days of occupancy. A 
shelter that affords good protection against fallout 
radiation and weather would be adequate in more 
than 95% of the area of the United States. However, 
even in almost all areas not endangered by blast and 
fire during a massive nuclear attack, the fallout 
protection provided by most existing buildings would 
not be adequate if the winds blew from the wrong 
direction during the time of fallout deposition. 

To remain in or near cities or other probable 
target areas, one would need better protection against 
blast, fire, and fallout than is provided by most 
shelters in buildings. Blast tests have proved that the 
earth-covered expedient fallout shelters described in 
this book qin survive blast effects severe enough to 
demolish most homes.5 

This chapter is concerned primarily with 
expedient shelters that give excellent protection 
against fallout radiation. These earth-covered fallout 
shelters could be built in 48 hours or less by tens of 
millions of Americans following field-tested, written 
instructions.8 Expedient blast shelters are discussed 
in Appendix D. The special blast doors and other 
design features needed for effective blast protection 
require more work, materials, and skill than are 
needed for expedient fallout shelters. 

If average Americans are to do their best when 
building expedient shelters and life-support equip- 
ment for themselves, they need detailed information 
about what to do and about why it is to their 
advantage to do it. We are not a people accustomed 

to blindly following orders. Unfortunately, during a 
crisis threatening nuclear war. it would take too long 
to read instructions explaining why each important 
feature was designed as specified. Therefore, only a 
few reasons are included in the step-by-step, 
illustrated instructions given in Appendix A for 
building 6 types of earth-covered expedient shelters 
during a crisis. 

In this chapter, reasons will be given for design- 
ing a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter as specified in the 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory instructions given 
in Appendix A.2. The two pages of drawings and 
plans given at the end of Appendix A.2 show the parts 
of this shelter, except for the essential shelter- 
ventilating pump installed in its entrance trench. The 
following account of how an urban family, after 
evacuating, used these instructions to build such a 
shelter in less than 36 hours also includes 
explanations of various radiation dangers and of 
simple means to build protection against these 
dangers. 

This family, like scores of other families 
recruited to build shelters or life-support equipment, 
was offered a sum about equivalent to Iah orers' wages 
if its members completed the experiment within a 
specified time. The test period began the moment the 
family received the written, illustrated instructions 
preparatory to evacuating by car, as mentioned in the 
preceding chapter. Like the other test families, this 
family was paid for all of its materials used. If a family 
worked hard and completed the project in half the 
specified time, it was paid a cash bonus. Throughout 
such tests workers were guided only by the written 
instructions, which were improved after each 
successive test. 

29 

30 

The successful outcome of almost all the shelter- 
building experiments indicates that tens of millions of 
Americans in a nuclear war crisis would work hard 
and successfully to build earth-covered expedient 
shelters that would give them better protection 
against fallout, blast, and fire than would all but a 
very small fraction of existing buildings. However, 
this belief is dependent on two conditions: (1) that in a 
desperate, worsening crisis our country's highest 
officials would supply strong, motivating leadership; 
and (2) that Americans would have received—well in 
advance—shelter-building and other practical, tested 
survival instructions. 

SHELTER AGAINST RADIATION 

The family previously pictured evacuating by car 
(.2) drove 64 miles to build a shelter at the site 
shown in .1. Although the August sun was very 
hot in this irrigated Utah valley, the family members 
did not build in the shade of nearby trees. To avoid 
digging through roots, they carried the poles about 
150 feet and dug their trench near the edge of the 
cornfield. 

The father and the oldest son did most of the 
work of making the shelter. The mother and second 

son had health problems: the two youngest children 
were not accustomed to work. 

The family followed an earlier version of the 
plans and instructions given in Appendix A for 
building a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. Because the 
earth was firm and stable, the trenches were dug with 
vertical walls. If the earth had been less stable, it 
would have been necessary to slope the walls— 
increasing the width at the top of the main trench 
from 3'/3 to 5 feet. 

Before placing the roof poles, the workers 
assured themselves a more comfortable shelter by 
covering the trench walls. They had brought a large 
number of the plastic garbage bags required in their 
home community and split some bags open to make 
wall coverings. Bed sheets or other cloth could have 
been used. 

The room of this 6-person shelter was 31/: feet 
wide, 41/: feet high, and 16'/: feet long. A small stand- 
up hole was dug at one end, so each tall occupant 
could stand up and stretch several times a day. 

The trenches for entry and emergency exit were 
dug only 22 inches wide, to minimize radiation 
entering the shelter through these openings. One wall 
of these two narrow trenches was an extension of the 

.1. Placing 9-foot poles for the roof of a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. 

3! 

room wall shown on the right in .1. The family 
sat and slept along the left wall, to be better shielded 
from radiation coming through the openings. 

This shelter was designed so that its main trench 
could be enlarged to make a much more livable room 
without disturbing its completed roof. For this 
reason, the 9-foot roofing poles were placed off- 
center, with the two extra feet resting on the ground 
to the right of the main room. 

Whenever practical, expedient shelters should 
be built so that they can be readily enlarged to make 
semi-permanent living quarters. After it becomes safe 
to emerge for limited periods, occupants could sleep 
and spend much of their waking time in such a 
rainproof dugout that affords excellent protection 
against continuing radiation. In cold weather, living 
in a dugout like this is more comfortable than living 
in a tent or shack. After the fallout radiation dose rate 
outdoors has decayed to less than about 2 R per hour, 
the small vertical entry could be enlarged and 
converted to a steeply inclined stairway. 

The importance of giving inexperienced shelter 
builders detailed instructions is illustrated by the 
unnecessary work done by the young women shown 
in .2. They had agreed to try to build a Pole- 
Covered Trench Shelter, working unassisted and 
using only hand tools. Because the summer sun in 
Utah was hot, they selected a shady site under a large 
tree. The brief instructions they received included no 
advice on the selection of a building site. Cutting and 
digging out the numerous roots was very difficult for 
them and required several of the 22 hours they spent 
actually working. 

Another disadvantage of making a shelter under 
trees is that more of the gamma rays from fallout 
particles on the leaves and branches would reach and 
penetrate the shelter than if these same particles were 
on the ground. Many gamma rays from fallout 
particles on the ground would be scattered or 
absorbed by striking rocks, clods of earth, tree 
trunks, or houses before reaching a belowground 
shelter. 

.2. Two non-athletic college girls who completed a 4-person Pole-Covered Trench Shelter in 35'/a 

hours, despite tree roots. 

32 

TYPES OF SHIELDING 

Shelters provide protection against radiation by 
utilizing two types of shielding: barrier shielding and 
geometry shielding. 

®. Barrier shielding is shown by .3, a 
simplified illustration. (In a real fallout area, a man in 
an open trench would have fallout particles all over 
and around him.) The 3-foot thickness of earth 
shown (or a 2-foot thickness of concrete) will provide 
an effective barrier, attenuating (absorbing) about 
99.9% of all gamma rays from fallout. (In the 
illustration, only a single fallout particle 3 feet from 
the edge of the trench is considered.) Only one 
gamma ray out of 1000 could penetrate the 3 feet of 
earth shown and strike the person in the trench. Rays 
from particles farther away than 3 feet would be 
negligible; rays from particles closer than 3 feet would 
bei attenuated according to the thickness of earth 
between the fallout particle and the man in the trench. 

However, the man in the trench would not be 
protected from "skyshine," which is caused by 
gamma rays scattering after striking the nitrogen, 
oxygen, and other atoms of the air. The man's 
exposed head, which is just below ground level, 
would be hit by about one-tenth as many gamma rays 

as if it were 3 feet above ground (.3). Even if all 
fallout could be kept out of the trench and off the man 
and every part of the ground within 3 feet of the edges 
of the trench, skyshine from heavy fallout on the 
surrounding ground could deliver a fatal radiation 
dose to the man in the open trench. 

Skyshine reaches the ground from all directions. 
If the man were sitting in a deeper trench, he would 
escape more of this scattered radiation, but not all of 
it. For good protection he must be protected 
overhead and on all sides by barrier shielding. 

The barrier shielding of the Pole-Covered. 
Trench Shelter shown in .4 was increased by 
shoveling additional earth onto its "buried roof." 
After father and son had mounded earth about 18 
inches deep over the centerline of the roof poles, a 
large piece of 4-mil-thick polyethylene was placed 
over the mound. This waterproof material served as a 
"buried roof after it was covered with more earth. 
Any rainwater trickling through the earth above the 
plastic would have run off the sloping sides of the 
"buried roof and away from the shelter. 

© Geometry shielding reduces the radiation dose 
received by shelter occupants by increasing the 
distances between them and fallout particles, and by 

ORNL-OWG 7B-7206 

.3. Simplified illustration of barrier shielding and skyshine (scattered gamma radiation). An open 

trench provides poor protection. 

■n 

.4. Increasing the barrier shielding over a Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. 

providing turns in the openings leading into the 
shelter. .5 is a sectional drawing of the shelter 
entry built by the Utah family. 

The farther you can keep away from a source 
either of light or of harmful radiation, the less light or 
other radiation will reach you. If fallout particles are 
on the roof of a tall building and you are in the 
basement, you will receive a much smaller radiation 
dose from those particles than if they were on the 
floor just above you. Likewise, if either visible light or 
gamma rays are coming through an opening at the far 
end of a passageway, less will reach you at the other 
end if the passageway is long than if it is short. 

Turns in passageways are very effective in 
reducing the amount of radiation entering a shelter 
through them. A right-angle turn, either from a 
vertical or horizontal entry, causes a reduction of 
about 90%. 

Note: Fallout shelters need not provide 
additional shielding to protect occupants against 
initial nuclear radiation that is emitted from the 
fireballs of nuclear explosions. (See Figs. 1.1 and 1.4.) 
Large nuclear weapons would be employed in an 
attack on the United States. Initial nuclear radiation 

would be so greatly reduced in passing through the 
miles of air between the fireball of a large nuclear 
explosion and fallout shelters far enough away to 
survive its blast effects, that occupants would not be 
endangered. (For a discussion of the more difficult 
shielding requirements of blast shelters that would 
enable occupants to survive blast effects much closer 
to explosions and therefore would be subjected to 
much larger exposures of initial nuclear radiation, see 
Appendix D, Expedient Blast Shelters.) 

.6 shows the completed shelter after it 
was occupied by the family of six just 32'/2 hours after 
receiving the shelter-building instructions and 
beginning preparations to evacuate. (This family won 
a bonus for completion within 36 hours and also a 
larger bonus given if all members then stayed inside 
continuously for at least 72 hours.) To get a better 
idea of how six people can live in such a small shelter, 
look at the drawings at the end of Appendix A.2. 
In warm or hot weather, shelters, especially 
crowded ones, must be well ventilated and cooled by 
an adequate volume of outdoor air pumped through 
them. This family had built an efficient homemade air 
pump (a KAP) and used it as described in Chapter 6 
and Appendix B. 

34 

ORNLOWG 78-7204 

SHELTER ROOM 

THRESHOLD BOARD 

FLOOR OF SHELTER 

.5. Skyshine coming into a shelter through a vertical entry would be mostly absorbed while turning 

into and traveling down the entryway trench. 

.6. Earth mounded over a 3!/2-fbot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. The canvas canopy would 
protect the vertical entry against both fallout and rain. (A smaller canopy over the air duct-emergency exit at the 
other end is obscured by the mounded earth.) 

35 

All of the earth excavated in digging the trenches 
was mounded over the roof poles, making a covering 
30 inches deep. This shelter had a protection factor 
(PF) of over 300; that is, persons inside would receive 
less than 1 / 300th of the gamma-ray dose of fallout 
radiation that they would receive if they were 
standing outside in the open. 

To have made the roof covering more than 36 
inches thick would not have increased the protection 
against radiation very much, unless the entry trench 
and the air duct-emergency exit trench had been dug 
considerably longer. Field tests have shown that 
some families, given only 48 hours, cannot dig the 
longer trenches, cut the additional poles, and shovel 
on the additional earth necessary for a shelter that 
would offer significantly better protection than the 
shelter shown here. The Pole-Covered Trench Shelter 
and the other shelters described in Appendix A all 
have been built by untrained families within 48 hours, 
the minimum time assumed to be available to 
Americans before a possible attack if the Russians 
should begin tq evacuate their cities. 

EARTH ARCHING USED TO 
STRENGTHEN SHELTERS 

Several types of expedient shelters can be made 
to withstand greater pressures if their roofs are built 
of yielding materials and covered with enough earth 

to attain "earth arching." This arching results when 
the yielding of the roof causes part of the load carried 
by the roof to be shifted to the overlying earth 
particles, which become rearranged in such a way 
that an arch is formed. This arch carries the load to 
surrounding supports that are less yielding. These 
supports often include adjacent earth that has not 
been disturbed. 

To attain earth arching, the earth covering the 
yielding roof must be at least as deep as half the width 
of the roof between its supports. Then the resultant 
earth arch above the roof carries most of the load. 

(A familiar example of effective earth arching is 
its use with sheet metal culverts under roads. The 
arching in a few feet of earth over a thin-walled 
culvert prevents it from be'ing crushed by the weight 
of heavy vehicles.) 

.7 shows how a flexible roof yields under 
the weight of 30 inches of earth mounded over it and 
how earth arching develops. After the arch is formed, 
the only weight that the yielding roof supports is the 
weight of the small thickness of earth between the 
roof and the bottom of the arch. 

Protective earth arching also results if a shelter is 
covered with a material that compresses when 
loaded, or if the whole roof or the whole shelter can 
be pushed down a little without being broken. 

ORNL-DWG 78-7441 
T 

*m/i$MW0i&//&& 
m 3-1/2 ft- 

.7. Earth arching over a yielding roof enables a shelter to withstand much greater pressures. 

36 

SHELTER AGAINST BETA AND 
ALPHA PARTICLES 

In addition to the invisible, light-like gamma 
rays, fallout particles radiate two types of hazardous 
invisible particles: beta and alpha particles. These 
radiations would be minor dangers to informed 
people in fallout areas, especially to those who had 
entered almost any kind of shelter before the fallout 
began to be deposited in their area. 

© Beta particles are high-speed electrons given off 
by some of the radioactive atoms in fallout. Only the 
highest-energy beta particles can penetrate more than 
about 10 feet of air or about '/s inch of water, wood, or 
human body tissue. Any building that keeps out 
fallout particles will prevent injury from beta radia- 
tion. 

The only frequently serious dangers are from (1) 
internal beta-radiation doses from fallout- 
contaminated food or drink, and (2) beta burns from 
fresh fallout particles. Fresh fallout particles are no 
more than a few days old and therefore very 
radioactive. If fresh particles remain for at least 
several tens of minutes in contact with the skin, beta 
bums are likely to result. If only thin clothing 
separates fresh fallout particles from the skin, a 
considerably longer time will elapse before their 
radiation causes beta burns. 

In dry, windy weather, fresh fallout particles 
might get inside one's nose and ears, along with dust 
and sand, and could cause beta burns if not promptly 
washed off or otherwise removed. 

Prompt washing will prevent beta burns. If 
water is not available, brushing and rubbing the 
fallout particles off the skin will help. 

If a person is exposed outdoors where there is 
heavy, fresh fallout for a long enough time to receive 
a large dose of gamma radiation, the highest-energy 
beta radiation given off by fresh fallout particles on 
the ground may be a relatively minor danger to his 
eyes and skin. Even ordinary glasses give good 
protection to the eyes against such beta radiation, 
and ordinary clothing gives good protection to the 
skin. 

Ordinary clothing will shield and protect the 
body quite well from all but the highest-energy beta 
particles given off by fresh fallout deposited on the 
clothing. Fallout-contaminated clothing should be 
removed as soon as practical, or at least brushed and 
beaten before entering a shelter room, to rid it of as 
many fallout particles as possible. (Fallout particles 
that are many days old will not cause beta burns 
unless laree Quantities are on the body for hours.) 

Most of the knowledge about beta burns on 
human skin was gathered as a result of an accident 
during the largest U.S. H-bomb test in the tropical 
Pacific.6 Winds blew the fallout in a direction not 
anticipated by the meteorologists. Five hours after 
the multimegaton surface burst, some natives of the 
Marshall Islands noticed a white powder beginning 
to be deposited on everything exposed, including 
their bare, moist skin. Unknown to them, the very 
small particles were fresh fallout. (Most fallout is 
sand-like, but fallout from bursts that have cratered 
calcareous rock, such as coral reefs and limestone, is 
powdery or flakey, and white.) Since the natives knew 
nothing about fallout, they thought the white dust 
was ashes from a distant volcanic eruption. For two 
days, until they were removed from their island 
homes and cared for by doctors, they paid practically 
no attention to the white dust. Living in the open and 
in lightly constructed homes, they received from the 
fallout all around them a calculated gamma-ray dose 
of about 175 R in the two days they were exposed. 

The children played in the fallout-contaminated 
sand. The fallout on these islanders' scalps, bare 
necks, and the tops of their bare feet caused itching 
and burning sensations after a time. Days later, beta 
burns resulted, along with extreme discoloration of 
the skin. Beta burns are not deep burns; however, it 
took weeks to heal them. Some, in spite of proper 
medical attention, developed into ulcers. (No serious 
permanent skin injury resulted, however.) 

For survivors confined inside crowded, 
unsanitary shelters by heavy fallout, and without 
medicines, beta burns could be a worse problem than 
were similar burns to the Marshall Islanders. 

All of the Marshall Islanders unknowingly ate 
fallout-contaminated food and drank fallout- 
contaminated water for two days. Mainly as a result 
of this, radioactive iodine was concentrated in their 
thyroid glands, and thyroid abnormalities developed 
years later. (There is a simple, very low-cost means of 
attaining almost complete protection against this 
delayed hazard: taking minute prophylactic doses of 
a salt, potassium iodide. This will be discussed in 
Chapter 13.) 

In dry, dusty, windy areas the human nasal 
passages usually filter out much dust. A large part of 
it is swallowed and may be hazardous if the dust is 
contaminated with fallout. Under such dry, windy 
conditions, beta burns also could be caused by large 
amounts of dust lodged inside the nasal passages. 
Breathing through a dust mask, towel, or other cloth 

would give good protection against this localized 
hazard. In conclusion: persons under nuclear attack 
should make considerable effort to protect them- 
selves from beta radiation. 

• Alpha particles, identical to the nuclei of helium 
atoms, are given off by some of the radioactive atoms 
in fallout. These particles have very little penetrating 
power: 1 to 3 inches of air will stop them. It is 
doubtful that alpha particles can get through 
unbroken skin; they cannot penetrate even a thin 
fabric.6 Alpha particles are hazardous only if 
materials that emit them (such as the radioactive 
element plutonium) enter the body and are retained 
in bone, lung tissue, or other parts of the body. Any 
shelter that excludes fallout particles affords 
excellent protection against this radiation danger. 
Unless survivors eat or drink fallout-contaminated 
food or water in considerably larger quantities than 
did the completely uninformed natives of the 
Marshall Islands, danger from alpha particles would 
be minor. 

PROTECTION AGAINST OTHER NUCLEAR 
WEAPONS EFFECTS 

• Flash burns are caused by the intense rays of 
heat emitted from the fireball within the first minute 
following an explosion.6 This thermal radiation 
travels at the speed of light and starts to heat or burn 
exposed people and materials before the arrival of the 
blast wave. Thermal radiation is reduced—but not 
eliminated—if it passes through rain, dense clouds, or 
thick smoke. On a clear day, serious flash burns on a 
person's exposed skin can be caused by a 20-megaton 
explosion that is 25 miles away. 

A covering of clothing—preferably of white 
cloth that reflects light—can reduce or prevent flash 
burns on those who are in a large part of an area in 
which thermal radiation is a hazard. However, in 
areas close enough to ground zero for severe blast 
damage, the clothing of exposed people could be set 
on fire and their bodies badly burned. 

® Fires ignited by thermal radiation and those 
resulting from blast and other causes especially 
would endanger people pinned down by fallout while 
in or near flammable buildings. The multiple dangers 
from fire, carbon monoxide, and toxic smokes will be 
discussed in a separate chapter. 

• Flash blindness can be caused by the intense 
light from an explosion tens of miles away in clear 
weather. Although very disturbing, the blindness is 
not permanent; most victims recover within seconds 

37 

to minutes. Among the Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
survivors (people who had been in the open more 
than persons expecting a nuclear attack would be), 
there were a number of instances of temporary 
blindness that lasted as long as 2 or 3 hours, but only 
one case of permanent retinal injury was reported.6 

Flash blindness may be produced by scattered 
light; the victim of this temporary affliction usually 
has not looked directly at the fireball. Flash blindness 
would be more severe at night, when the pupils are 
larger. Retinal burns, a permanent injury, can result 
at great distances if the eye is focused on the fireball. 

People inside any shelter with no openings 
through which light can shine directly would be 
protected from flash burns and eye damage. Persons 
in the open with adequate warning of a nuclear 
explosion can protect themselves from both flash 
blindness and retinal burns by closing or shielding 
their eyes. They should get behind anything casting a 
shadow— quickly. 

SKIN BURNS FROM HEATED DUST 
(THE POPCORNING EFFECT) 

When exposed grains of sand and particles of 
earth are heated very rapidly by intense thermal 
radiation, they explode like popcorn and pop up into 
the air.6 While this dust is airborne, the continuing 
thermal radiation heats it to temperatures that may 
be as high as several thousand degrees Fahrenheit on 
a clear day in areas of severe blast. Then the shock 
wave and blast winds arrive and can carry the 
burning-hot air and dust into an open shelter.6'9 
Animals inside open shelters have been singed and 
seriously burned in some of the nuclear air-burst tests 
in Nevada.9 

Thus Japanese working inside an open tunnel- 
shelter at Nagasaki within about 100 yards of ground 
zero were burned on the portion of their skin that was 
exposed to the entering blast wind, even though they 
were protected by one or two turns in the tunnel. 
(None of these Japanese workers who survived the 
blast-wave effects had fatal burns or suffered serious 
radiation injuries, which they certainly would have 
suffered had they been outside and subjected to the 
thermal pulse and the intense initial nuclear radiation 
from the fireball.) 

Experiments conducted during several nuclear 
test explosions have established the amount of 
thermal radiation that must be delivered to exposed 
earth to produce the popcorning effect.6 Large air 
bursts may result in exposed skin being burned by hot 

38 

dust and heated air produced at overpressure ranges 
as low as 3 or 4 psi. However, calculations indicate 
that the large surface bursts most likely to endanger 
Americans would not result in the occupants of small, 
open shelters being burned by these effects—except 
at somewhat higher overpressures. 

Protection is simple against the heated dust and 
very hot air that may be blown into an open shelter by 
the blast. When expecting an attack, occupants of an 
open shelter should keep towels or other cloths in 
hand. When they see the bright light from an explo- 
sion, they should cover their heads and exposed skin. 
If time and materials are available, much better 
protection is given by making expedient blast doors, 
as described in Appendix D. When occupants seethe 
very bright light from a large explosion miles away, 
they can close and secure such doors before the 
arrival of the blast wave several seconds later. 

ESSENTIAL LIFE-SUPPORT EQUIPMENT 

Shelters can be built to give excellent protection 
against all nuclear weapon effects, except in places 
within or very close to cratered areas. But most 
shelters would be of little use in areas of heavy fallout 
unless supplied with enough life-support equipment 
to enable occupants to stay in the shelters until condi- 
tions outside become endurable. In heavy fallout 
areas most high-protection-factor shelters would be 
crowded; except in cold weather, most would need a 
ventilating pump to remove warmed air and bring in 
enough cooler outdoor air to maintain survivable 
temperature-humidity conditions. Means for storing 
adequate water is another essential life-support 
requirement. These and other essential or highly 
desirable life-support needs are covered in following 
chapters. 

BASEMENT SHELTERS 

The blast and fire effects of a massive, all-out 
attack of the magnitude possible in 1979 would 
destroy or damage most American homes and other 
buildings and endanger the occupants of shelters 
inside them. Outside the risk areas, the use of shelters 
inside buildings would not be nearly as hazardous. 
However, an enemy might also target some areas into 
which large numbers of urban Americans had 
evacuated before the attack. 

would evacuate into areas outside probable blast 
areas, probably would lack the tools, materials, 
space, determination, physical strength, or time 
required to build good expedient shelters that are 
separate from buildings and covered with earth. As a 
result, most unprepared urban citizens would have to 
use basements and other shelters in existing 
structures, for want of better protection. 

Shelters in buildings, including basement 
shelters, have essentially the same requirements as 
expedient shelters: adequate shielding against fallout 
radiation, strength, ventilation and cooling, water, 
fallout radiation meters, food, hygiene, etc. Sketches 
and short descriptions of ways to improve the fallout 
protection afforded by home basements are to be 
found in widely distributed civil defense pamphlets, 
including two entitled "In Time of Emergency," and 
"Protection in the Nuclear Age." In 1979, millions of 
copies of these pamphlets are stockpiled for possible 
distribution during a crisis. Unfortunately, most of 
such official instructions were written years ago, 
when the deliverable enemy megatonnage was a small 
fraction of what it is today. Official civil defense 
instructions available to average Americans in 1979 
do not inform the reader as to what degree of 
protection against fallout radiation (what protection 
factor) is given by the different types of do-it-yourself 
shelters pictured. There is no mention of dependable 
ways to provide adequate cooling-ventilation, an 
essential requirement if even a home basement is to be 
occupied by several families in warm or hot weather. 
Outdated or inadequate information is given about 
water, food, the improvement of shelter in one's 
home, and other survival essentials. 

No field-tested instructions at present are 
available to guide householders who may want to 
strengthen the floor over a home basement so that it 
can safely support 2 feet of shielding earth piled on it. 
In areas of heavy fallout, such strengthening often 
would be needed.to safely support adequate overhead 
shielding, especially if the house were to be jarred by a 
light shock from a distant explosion. In the following 
paragraphs, a way to greatly improve the fallout 
protection afforded by a typical home basement is 
outlined. If improved in this manner, a basement 
would provide excellent fallout protection for several 
families. 

Earth-covered expedient shelters in a blast area 
give better protection against injury from blast, fire, 
or fallout than do almost all basements. But during 
the more likely kinds of crises threatening nuclear 
war most urban Americans, including those who 

First, earth should be placed on the floor above 
to a depth of about one foot. Earth can be carried 
efficiently by using sacks or pillowcases, using the 
techniques described in Chapter 8 for carrying water. 
If earth is not available because the ground is frozen 

or because of the lack of digging tools, other heavy 
materials (containers of water, heavy furniture, 
books, etc.) should be placed on the floor above. 
These materials should weigh enough to produce a 
loading of about 90 pounds per square foot—about 
the same weight as earth one foot thick. This initial 
loading of the floor joists causes them to carry some 
of the weight that otherwise would be supported by 
the posts that then are to be installed. 

Next, a horizontal beam is installed so as to 
support all of the floor joists under their centers. 
.8 shows a beam and one of its supporting 
posts. Such a supporting beam preferably is made by 
nailing three 2X6s securely together. (Three 2X4s 
would serve quite well.) 

ORNL-OWG 7S-18368 

.8. Supporting beam and one of its posts 
installed to increase the load of shielding material 
that can be carried safely by the floor above a 
home basement. 

Cut posts to fit exactly under the beam. If trees at 
least 4 inches in diameter are not available, make 
posts by nailing boards together. Position the two 
outermost posts within 2 feet of the ends of the beam. 
Space the posts at even intervals, with each post 
under a floor joist. A post under every third joist is 
ideal; this usually means a spacing between posts of 
about 4'/z feet. If the basement is 20 feet long, 5 posts 
are enough. Nail each pest to the beam, and secure 
the bases of each with brace boards laid on the 
basement floor, as illustrated. 

39 

Finally, place a second 1-foot-thick layer of 
earth on the floor above. If the basement windows are 
protected with boards and if all but a part of one 
window and all the aboveground parts of the 
basement walls are covered with earth 2 feet thick, the 
basement shelter will have a protection factor of 
several hundred against fallout radiation. 

Adequate ventilation and cooling should be 
assured by using a homemade air pump (a KAP), 
made and installed as described in Appendix B. 
Forced ventilation is especially necessary if more 
than one family occupies the basement in warm or 
hot weather. 

More work and materials are required to 
improve a home basement in this manner than are 
needed to build a covered-trench shelter for one 
family. An earth-covered shelter separate from 
buildings will provide equally good protection 
against radiation, better protection against blast, and 
much better protection against fire. 

If a family cannot build a separate, earth- 
covered shelter outdoors, often it would be advisable 
to make a very small shelter in the most protected 
corner of the basement. Such an indoor shelter 
should be of situp height (about 40 inches for tall 
people) and no wider than 3 feet. Its walls can readily 
be built of -chairs, benches, boxes, and bureau 
drawers. Interior doors make an adequately strong 
roof. Expedient shielding materials, to be placed on 
the roof and the two exposed sides, can be ordinary 
water containers and bureau drawers, boxes, and 
pillow cases filled with earth or other heavy materials. 
Or, if heavy-duty plastic trash bags or 4-mil 
polyethylene film are available, make expedient 
water containers and use them for shielding. To do 
so, first line bureau drawers, boxes, pillow cases, 
trash cans, etc. with plastic. Place the lined containers 
in position to shield your shelter, then fill these 
expedient water containers with drinkable water (see 
Chapter 8). 

As demonstrated by hot-weather occupancy 
tests of such very small indoor shelters, a small KAP 
or other air pump must be operated to maintain a 
forced flow of air through such a crowded shelter, to 
prevent intolerable temperature-humidity 
conditions. (See Chapter 6 for ventilation-cooling 
requirements, including the provision of an 
adequately large opening in each end of a shelter.) In 
some basements a second small KAP would be 
needed in hot weather to pump outdoor air through 
the basement. This KAP could be operated by pulling 

40 

a cord from within the small shelter, using an 
improvised "pulley" as described in Appendix B. 

PUBLIC SHELTERS 

In the event of an unexpected attack, many 
unprepared Americans should and would take refuge 
in nearby marked public shelters. Throughout the 
populated areas that would not be subjected to blast, 
fire, or heavy fallout, the use of public shelters could 
save millions of lives. All persons concerned with 
survival should remember that the large majority of 
officially surveyed and marked shelters give better 
protection against radiation than most unimproved 
home basements. 

Persons preparing to go to public shelters should 
be aware that many lack forced ventilation and that 
the blowers and fans of most forced ventilation 
systems would be stopped by loss of electric power 
due to electromagnetic pulse effects or by other 
effects of nuclear explosions on electrical systems. A 
blast wave at an overpressure range as low as 1 psi 
(144 pounds per square foot) would wreck most 
shelter-ventilating fans. In 1979, no water or food 
normally is stocked. A person who brought to a 
public shelter 10 large plastic trash bags and 10 pillow 
slips, to make 10 expedient water bags in which 60 
gallons of water could be stored (as described in 
Chapter 8), would help both himself and dozens of 
other shelter occupants. If he hoped to share the 
basement in a strange family's home, his chances of 
being welcomed would be improved if he brought a 
small homemade shelter-ventilating pump and other 
survival items. The same small pump would be 
impractical in a large public shelter. An Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory study completed in 1978 found 
that if all citizens were to go to National Shelter 
Survey (NSS) shelters within one mile of their homes, 
69% of those who found space would be in shelters 
rated for 1000 or more occupants.10 The average 
number of shelter spaces in this largest class of public 
shelters is 3179. The prospect of living in an 
unequipped shelter crowded with this many 
unprepared people—each of whom would have only 
10 square feet of floor space—is a strong motivation 
to work hard to build and equip a small, earth- 
covered shelter. 

DECIDING WHAT KIND OF SHELTER 
TO BUILD OR USE 

Before deciding what kind of shelter you and 
your family should build or use, it is best to read all of 

this book. Your final decision should include 
consideration of ways to provide life-support 
equipment discussed in following chapters. At this 
stage, however, the reader will find it helpful to 
review important reasons why different types of 
shelters offer the best hope of survival to different 
people, in different areas, and under different 
conditions. 

This book is written primarily to improve the 
survival chances of people who cannot or do not 
build permanent shelters. The information which 
follows will help you select the best expedient or 
available shelter for your family. 

SHELTER NEAR OR IN YOUR HOME 

If your home is 20 or more miles from an average 
target such as most cities or a large industrial 
complex, or is 40 or more miles from a major target 
such as a great city, you are fortunate: you should 
build or use a shelter close to home. No one can 
foretell accurately which way the winds will blow or 
where weapons will explode, so, if practical, you 
should build a shelter that gives better protection 
against fallout, blast, and fire than shelters in 
buildings. Most people living outside targeted areas 
could build such a shelter in two days or less, using 
one of the designs of earth-covered expedient shelters 
detailed in Appendix A. 

Even if you plan to evacuate, you should decide 
where you would take shelter nearby in case you were 
unable to do so. There is always a chance that an 
attack may be launched without warning, giving 
insufficient time to evacuate. Or the missile aimed at 
the area in which you live may miss its target. If your 
targeted home area were not hit, moderately heavy 
fallout might be the only danger; even an improved 
basement shelter would be adequate in that case. 

EARTH-COVERED EXPEDIENT 
FAMILY SHELTERS 

Advantages of earth-covered, expedient family 

shelters: 

* Better protection against heavy fallout, blast, 
and fire than afforded by the great majority of 
shelters in buildings. 

* The possibility of building in favorable 
locations, including places far removed from target 
areas, and places where it is impractical to build or to 
improve large group-shelters giving good protection. 

41 

* The opportunity for men, women, and 
children to work together to provide good protection 
in minimum time. 

* The availability in some shelters of fallout 
meters and occupants who know how to use them and 
who can provide other needed skills. 

* A better chance to benefit from thoughtful 
preparations made in advance than would be the case 
in public shelters where water, food, etc. must be 
shared. 

■* Less risk of personality clashes, hysteria under 
stress, exposure to infectious diseases, and other 
problems that arise when strangers are crowded 
together for days or weeks. 

Disadvantages of earth-covered, expedient 

shelters: 

* It may be difficult to meet the requirement for 
time, space, people able to work hard, materials, and 
tools—and to get all these together at the building 
site. 

* Building is difficult if heavy rain or snow is 
falling or if the ground is deeply frozen. (However, 
untrained Americans have built good fallout shelters 
with shielding provided by 5 or more feet of packed 
snow," including a winter version of the Crib-Walled 
Pole Shelter described in Appendix A. The practi- 
cality of several Russian designs of snow-covered 
expedient shelters also has been demonstrated by 
winter construction tests in Colorado.12) 

* The fewer occupants of family shelters could 
not provide as many helpful skills as would be found 
in most public shelters, with tens-to-thousands of 
occupants. 

* The lack of instruments for measuring 
changing radiation dangers. However, the occupants 
could make a homemade fallout meter by following 
the instructions in Appendix C, or buy a commercial 
instrument before a rapidly worsening crisis arises. 

PUBLIC AND OTHER EXISTING SHELTERS 

Advantages of the great majority of public and 
other existing shelters, most of which are in buildings: 

* Their immediate availability in many 
localities, without work or the need to supply 
materials and tools. 

* The chance for persons who are not able to 
carry food or water to a public shelter to share some 
brought by the more provident occupants. 

Disadvantages of the great majority of public 
and other existing shelters available to large numbers 
of people: 

* The location of most of them in targeted areas. 

* Poor protection against blast, fire and carbon 

monoxide. 

* Lack of water and means for storing it (in 

1979) and lack of stocked food. 

* No reliable air pumps, which are essential in 
warm or hot weather for supplying adequate ventilat- 
ing-cooling air to maintain endurable conditions in 
fully occupied shelters—especially belowground. 

* Uncertainties regarding the availability of 
fallout meters and occupants who know how to use 
them. 

* No dependable lights, sanitary facilities, or 
other life-support equipment, with few exceptions. 

* The crowding together of large numbers of 
people who are strangers to each other. Under 
frightening conditions that might continue for weeks, 
the greater the number of people, the greater would 
be the risks of the spread of infectious diseases and of 
hysteria, personality clashes, and the development of 
other conflicts. 

BELOWGROUND EXPEDIENT 
FALLOUT SHELTERS 

(Appendix A details two designs of below- 
ground shelters, three designs of aboveground 
shelters, and one design that affords excellent 
protection built either below or aboveground). 

Advantages of belowground, earth-covered 

expedient fallout shelters: 

* They afford better protection than do above- 

ground, earth-covered types. 

* The provision of fair-to-excellent fallout 
protection—generally much better than citizens have 
available in their homes. 

* Less time, work, and materials are required to 
build them than to build equally protective above- 
ground designs. 

42 

* If built sufficiently separated from houses and 
flammable woods, they provide much better protec- 
tion against fire hazards than do shelters in buildings. 

* If dug in stable earth, even types with 
unshored earth walls give quite good blast protection 
up to overpressure ranges of at least 5 psi—where 
most homes and buildings would be destroyed by 
blast or fire. 

Disadvantages of belowground expedient fall- 

out shelters: 

* They are not practical in areas where the water 

table or rock is very near the surface. 

* It is impractical to build them in deep-frozen 

ground. 

* They are usually more crowded and 

uncomfortable than improved basement shelters. 

EXPEDIENT BLAST SHELTERS 

Advantages of expedient blast shelters: 

* Occupants could survive uninjured in 
extensive blast areas where fallout shelters would not 
prevent death or injury. 

.* Blast doors would protect occupants from 
shock waves, dangerous overpressures, blast winds, 
and burns on exposed skin caused by the popcorning 
effect and heated air. 

Disadvantages of expedient blast shelters are 
their requirements for more time, materials, tools, 
skill, and work than are needed for building fallout 
shelters. 

Chapter 6 

Ventilation and" Cooling of Shelters . 

CRITICAL IMPORTANCE 

If high-protection-factor shelters or most other 
shelters that lack adequate forced ventilation were 
fully occupied for several days in warm or hot 
weather, they would become so hot and humid that 
the occupants would collapse from the heat if they 
were to remain inside. It is important to understand 
that the heat and water vapor given off by the bodies 
of people in a crowded, long-occupied shelter could 
be deadly if fallout prevents leaving the shelter. 

When people enter an underground shelter or 
basement in the summertime, at first the air feels 
cool. However, if most shelters are fully occupied for 
a few days without adequate ventilation, the floors, 
walls, and ceilings, originally cool, will have 
absorbed about all the body heat of which they are 
capable. Some shelters will become dangerously hot 
in a few hours. Unless most of the occupants' body 
heat and water vapor from sweat are removed by 
air circulated through a typical shelter, the heat- 
humidity conditions will become increasingly dan- 
gerous in warm or hot weather. One of the most 
important nuclear war survival skills people should 
learn is how to keep occupied shelters adequately 
ventilated in all seasons and cool enough for many 
days of occupancy in warm or hot weather. Methods 
for keeping ventilating air from carrying fall- 
out particles into shelters also are described in 
Appendix A and Appendix B. 

MAKING AND USING AN EXPEDIENT 
AIR PUMP 

The best expedient way to maintain livable 
conditions in a shelter, especially in hot weather, is to 
make and use a large-volume shelter-ventilating 
pump. Field tests have proved that average Ameri- 

cans can build the expedient air pump described in 
Appendix B in a few hours, with inexpensive 
materials found in most household's. 

This simple pump was invented in 1962 by the 
author. I called it a Punkah-Pump, because its hand- 
pulled operation is somewhat like that of an ancient 
fan called a "punkah", still used by some primitive 
peoples in hot countries. (Unlike the punkah, 
however, this air pump can force air to move in a 
desired direction and is a true pump.) It was named 
the Kearny Air Pump (KAP) by the Office of Civil 
Defense following tests of various models by 
Stanford Research Institute, the Protective Struc- 
tures Development Center, and General American 
Transportation Company. These tests confirmed 
findings first made at Oak Ridge National Labora- 
tory regarding the advantages of the KAP both as a 
manually operated pump for forcing large volumes of 
outdoor air through shelters and as a device for 
distributing air within shelters and fanning the 
occupants. See .1. 

The air pump instructions given in Appendix B 
are the result of having scores of families and pairs of 
untrained individuals, including children, build and 
use this air pump. They were guided by successively 
improved versions of these detailed, written instruc- 
tions, that include many illustrations (see Appendix 
B). Some people who are experienced at building 
things will find these instructions unnecessarily long 
and detailed. However, shelter-building experiments 
have shown that the physically stronger individuals, 
usually the more experienced builders, should do 
more of the hard, manual work when shelters are 
built, and that those less experienced at building 
should do the lighter work—including making 
shelter-ventilating pumps. These detailed, step-by- 
step instructions have enabled people who never 

43 

'§K538BääsÄÄäs 

.1. A 6-foot KAP tested for durability at 
Oak Ridge. After 1000 hours of operation during 
which it pumped air through a room at a rate of 4000 
cubic feet per minute (4000 cfm), there were only 
minor tears in the plastic flaps. 

before had attempted to build a novel device of any 
kind to make serviceable air pumps. 

(The air pump instructions given in Appendix B 
repeat some information in this chapter. This 
repetition is included both to help the reader when he 
starts to build an air pump and to increase the 
chances of the best available complete instructions 
being given to local newspapers during some future 
crisis. The instructions given in this book could be 
photographed, reproduced, and mass-distributed by 
newspapers.) 

.2 shows (behind the girl) a 20-inch-wide 
by 36-inch-high KAP installed in the entry trench of a 
trench shelter. The father of the Utah family 
described earlier had made this simple pump at 
home, using only materials and tools found in many 
homes—as described in Appendix B. He carried the 
pump on top of his car to the shelter-building site. 
The pendulum-like, flap-valve pump was swung from 
two cabinet hinges (not shown) screwed onto a 
board. The board was nailed to roof poles of the 
narrow entry trench extending behind the girl in the 
photograph. The pull-cord was attached to the pump 
frame below its hinged top and extended along one 
trench wall for the whole length of the shelter. Any 

.2. Behind the girl is the homemade air 
pump that made it possible for a family of six to live 
in a crowded trench shelter for more than three days. 
Outside the temperature rose to 93° F. 

one of the six occupants could pull this cord and 
easily pump as much as 300 cubic feet per minute of 
outdoor air through the shelter and through the 
insect screens over both its entrances. (Without these 
screens, the numerous mosquitoes in this irrigated 
area would have made the family's shelter stay very 
unpleasant.) 

During the 77 hours that the family continu- 
ously occupied their narrow, covered trench, the tem- 
peratures outside rose as high as 93° F. Without the 
air pump, the six occupants would have been driven 
from their shelter by unbearable temperature- 
humidity conditions during the day.8 

The photo in .2 also shows how the air 
pump hung when not being operated, partially, 
blocking the entry trench and causing a "chimney 
effect"flow of airat night. There was a 10-inchspace 
between the air pump and the trench floor, and the 
resulting flow of air maintained adequate ventilation 
in the cool of the desert night, when outdoor 
temperatures dropped as low as 45° F. Cool outdoor 
air flowed down into the entry and under the 
motionless air pump, replacing the body-warmed air 
inside the shelter. The entering coo! air continuously 

forced the warm air out of the shelter room at ceiling 
height through the emergency crawlway-exhaust 
trench at the other end. When the weather is cool, a 
piece of plastic or tightly woven cloth could be hung 
in the doorway of a well designed, narrow shelter, to 
cause a flow of fresh air in the same manner. 

Numerous shelter occupancy tests have proved 
that modern Americans can live for weeks in an 
adequately cooled shelter with only 10 square feet of 
floor space per person.13 Other tests, such as one 
conducted by the Navy near Washington, D.C. 
during an abnormally cool two weeks in August, 
1962, have shown that conditions can become 
difficult even when summertime outdoor air is being 
pumped through a long-occupied shelter at the rate 
of 12 cubic feet per minute, per person.14'15 This is 
four times the minimum ventilation rate for each 
occupant specified by the Defense Civil Preparedness 
. Agency (DCPA) for American shelters: 3 cubic feet 
per minute (3 cfm). Three cfm is about three times the 
supply of outdoor air needed to keep healthy people 
from having headaches as a result of exhaled carbon 
dioxide. In hot, humid weather, much more outdoor 
air than 12 cfm per person must be supplied to a 
crowded, long-occupied shelter, as will be described 
in the following section and in Appendix B. 

MAINTAINING ENDURABLE SHELTER 
CONDITIONS IN HOT WEATHER 

The Navy test mentioned above showed how 
much modern Americans who are accustomed to air 
conditioning could learn from jungle natives about 
keeping cool and healthy by skillfully using hot, 
humid, outdoor air. While working in jungles from 
the Amazon to Burma, I observed the methods used 
by the natives to avoid unhealthful conditions like 
those experienced in the Navy shelter, which was 
ventilated in a conventional American manner. These 
jungle methods include the first five of the six cooling 
methods listed in this section. During 18 years of civil 
defense research, my colleagues and 1 have improved 
upon the cooling methods of jungle people, primarily 
by the invention and thorough field-testing of the 
homemade KAP described in Appendix B. 

Even during a heat wave in a hot part of the 
United States, endurable conditions can be main- 
tained in a fully occupied, belowground shelter with 
this simple pump, if the test-proven requirements 
listed below are ALL met. 

Most basement shelters and many aboveground 
shelters also can be kept at livable temperatures in 

45 

hot weather if the cooling methods listed below :ire 
ALL followed: 

• Supply enough air to carry away all the shelter 
occupants' body heat without raising the "effective 
temperature" of the air at the exhaust end of the 
shelter by more than 2°F. The "effective tempera- 
ture" of the air to which a person is exposed is 
equivalent to the temperature of air at 100% relative 
humidity that causes the same sensation of warmth or 
cold. "Effective temperature" combines the effects of 
the temperature of the air, its relative humidity, and 
its movement. An ordinary thermometer does not 
measure effective temperature. In occupancy tests of 
crowded shelters when the supply of outdoor air was 
hot and dry, shelter occupants have been surprised to 
find that they felt hottest at the air-exhaust end of 
their shelter, where the temperature reading was 
lower than at the air-intake end. Their sweaty bodies 
had acted as evaporative air coolers, but their bod> 
heat had raised the effective temperature, a reliable 
indicator of heat stress. If 40 cubic feet per minute (40 
cfm) per person of outdoor air is supplied and 
properly distributed, then (even if the outdoor air is 
at a temperature which is typical of the hottest hours 
during a heat wave in a hot, humid area of the United 
States) the effective temperatureoftheshelterairwill 
be increased no more than 2°F by the shelter 
occupants' body heat and water vapor. Except for a 
relatively few sick people dependent on air condition- 
ing, anyone could endure air that has an effective 
temperature only 2°F higher than that of the air 
outdoors. 

(There are exceptions to this ventilation require- 
ment when the ceiling or walls of basement or 
aboveground shelters in buildings are heated by the 
sun to levels higher than skin temperature. In such 
shelters, more than 40 cfm of outdoor air per 
occupant must be supplied. However, if a shelter is 
covered by at least two feet of earth, it will be so well 
insulated that its ceiling and walls will not get hot 
enough to heat the occupants.) 

® Move the air gently, so as not to raise its 
temperature. In the aforementioned Navy test, a high 
speed, electric ventilating pump and the frictional 
resistance of pipes and filters raised the temperature 
of the air supplied to the shelter by 3°F. Under 
extreme heat wave conditions, an air supply 3°F 
hotter than outdoor air could be disastrous—espe- 
cially if considerably less than 40 cfm per occupant is 
supplied, and body heat raises the air temperature 
several additional degrees. 

46 

® Distribute the air quite evenly throughout the 
shelter. In a trench shelter, where air is pumped in at 
one end and flows out the other, good distribution is 
assured. In larger shelters, such as basements, 
ventilating air will move from the air-supply opening 
straight to the air-exhaust opening. Persons out of 
this air stream will not be adequately cooled. By using 
one or more additional, smaller KAPs (also described 
in Appendix B), fresh air can be distributed easily 
throughout large shelter rooms, and the occupants 
will be gently fanned. 

S Provide occupants with adequate drinking 
water and salt. In extremely hot weather, this means 4 
quarts of water per day per person and % tablespoon 
(10 grams) of salt, including the salt in food. 

© Wear as few clothes as practical. When the skin 
is bare, moving air can evaporate sweat more 
efficiently for effective cooling. Air movement can 
keep bare skin drier, and therefore less susceptible to 
heat rash and skin infections. In the inadequately 
ventilated Navy test shelter, 34 of the 99 initially 
healthy young men had heat rash and 23 had more 
serious skin complaints at the end of their sweaty 
two-week confinement, although their overall physi- 
cal condition had not deteriorated. 

® Keep pumping about 40 cfm of air per person 
through the shelter both day and night during hot 
weather, so that the occupants and the shelter itself 
will be cooled off at night. In the Navy test, the 
ventilation rate of 7 to 12 cfm was not high enough to 
give occupants the partial relief from heat and 
sweating that people normally get at night.15 In a 
National Academy of Sciences meeting on protective 
shelters, an authority stated: "Laboratory experi- 
ments and field investigations have shown that 
4 healthy persons at rest can tolerate daily exposures to 
ETs [effective temperatures] up to 90° F, provided 
they can get a good night's sleep in a cooler 
environment."14 An effective temperature of 90°F is 
higher than the highest outdoor effective temperature 
during a heatwave in the South or in American 
deserts. 

ADEQUATE VENTILATION IN 
COLD WEATHER 

In freezing weather, a belowground shelter 
covered with damp earth may continue to absorb 
almost all of its occupants' body heat for many days 
and stay unpleasantly cold. In one winter test of such 
a fully occupied shelter, the temperature of the humid 

air in the shelter remained around 50°F.1 Under 
such conditions, shelter occupants should continue 
to ventilate their shelter adequately, to avoid the 
following conditions: 

• A dangerous buildup of carbon dioxide from 
exhaled breath, the first symptoms of which are 
headaches and deeper breathing. 

© Headaches from the carbon monoxide produced 
by smoking. When the ventilation rate is low, 
smoking should not be permitted, even near the 
exhaust opening. 

© Headaches, collapse, or death due to carbon 
monoxide from open fires or gasoline lanterns that 
release gases into the shelter air. 

NATURAL VENTILATION 

Enough air usually will be blown through an 
aboveground shelter if sufficiently large openings are 
provided on opposite sides and if there is any breeze. 
But if the weather is warm and still and the shelter 
crowded, the temperature-humidity conditions soon 
can become unbearable. 

Adequate natural ventilation for belowground 
shelters is more difficult. Even if there is a light 
breeze, not much air will make a right-angle turn and 
go down a vertical entry, make another right angle 
turn, and then flow through a trench or other shelter 
partially obstructed by people and supplies. 

In cool weather, occupants' body heat will warm 
the shelter air and make it lighter than the outdoor 
air. If a chimney-like opening or vent-duct is 
provided in the ceiling, the warmed, lighter air will 
flow upward and out of the shelter, provided an 
adequate air-intake vent is open near the floor. An 
Eskimo igloo is an excellent example of how very 
small ventilation openings, skillfully located in the 
ceiling and at floor level, make it possible in cold 
weather for chimney-type natural ventilation to 
supply the I cfm per person of outdoor air needed to 
prevent exhaled carbon dioxide from becoming 
dangerously concentrated. 

In warm weather, chimney-type natural ventila- 
tion usually is inadequate for most high-protection- 
factor shelters that are fully occupied for days. And in 
hot weather, when as much as 40 cfm per occupant is 
required, body-warmed shelter air is no lighter than 
the outdoor air. Chimney-type ventilation fails 
completely under these conditions. 

SAFE SHELTER VENTILATION 
WITHOUT FILTERS 

Numerous tests have shown that the hazards 
from fallout particles carried into shelters by 
unfiltered ventilating air are minor compared to the 
dangers from inadequate ventilation. A 1962 sum- 
mary of the official standards for ventilating systems 
of fallout shelters stated: "Air filters are not essential 
for small (family size) shelters..."17 More recent 
findings have led to the same conclusion for large 
fallout shelters. A 1973 report by the Subcommittee 
on Fallout of the National Academy of Sciences on 
the radioiodine inhalation problem stated this 
conclusion: "The opinion of the Subcommittee is that 
inhalation is far less of a threat than ingestion [eating 
or drinking], and does not justify countermeasures 
such as filters in the ventilating systems of shelters."18 

In warm weather, it is essential to pump enough 
air through very small shelters like the one shown in 
.3. The photograph shows a man inside a Car- 
Over-Trench Shelter that provides fallout protection 

.3. Pulling a small, stick-frame KAP to 
keep temperatures endurable for occupants of a Car- 
Over-Trench-Shelter. 

47 

about four times as effective as that given by the 
average home basement. The shelter was completed 
by piling earth inside and around the car that had 
been driven over the narrow trench. The shielding 
earth around the car's sides was piled against 
polyethylene film taped to the sides, to keep earth 
from going under the car. In warm or hot weather 
such a shelter cannot be occupied for long without 
forced ventilation. 

Fallout particles that reach the earth within the 
first 24 hours after an explosion are so large and fast- 
falling that virtually all of them would be deposited 
on the ground. They would not fall into a properly 
designed shelter, especially one with a low-speed air 
intake. Particles small enough for a person to breathe 
into his lungs generally take several days to fall from 
where they are first carried, miles high in a mushroom 
cloud. By the time these small fallout particles are 
near the earth, the generally westerly winds blowing 
around the world at high altitudes would have carried 
them to Europe, or Asia, or back around the earth to 
North America. After days-to-weeks of wide disper- 
sal and radioactive decay, such small particles would 
constitute a minor health hazard compared to other 
injurious conditions that would afflict an unprepared 
people subjected to a large-scale nuclear attack. 

When sand-like fallout is being deposited, the 
occupants of small expedient shelters should decide 
whether to restrict or stop ventilation. If it is windy 
outside, some of the sand-like particles may be blown 
into a small open shelter. Ventilation should not be 
restricted long enough to cause serious overheating 
or headaches from exhaled carbon dioxide. As in a 
sand storm, breathing through a dust mask or towel 
would be helpful to avoid getting fallout particles 
into one's nose and mouth. Likewise, if a house is 
burning dangerously close to a separate, earth- 
covered shelter, closing the shelter's ventilation 
openings for an hour or two usually will prevent the 
entry of dangerous concentrations of carbon monox- 
ide, carbon dioxide, or smoke. (Most houses will 
burn to the ground in less than two hours.) 

When an attack is expected, an occupied shelter 
should be kept as cool as practical by pumping large 
volumes of outdoor air through it. This also will 
assure that the air is fresh and low in exhaled carbon 
dioxide. Then, if a need arises to stop or restrict 
ventilation, the shelter can be closed for longer than 
could be done safely otherwise. 

Chapter 7 

Protection Against Fires and Carbon Monoxide 

RELATIVE DANGERS 

Fire and its consequences probably would be the 
third-ranking danger to unprepared Americans 
subjected to a massive nuclear attack. Direct blast 
effects would be first, covering a large fraction of 
densely populated areas and killing far more people. 
Considerably fewer fatalities seem likely to result 
from the second-ranking danger, fallout radiation. 

THE FACTS ABOUT FIRE HAZARDS 

Firestorms would endanger relatively few 
Americans; only the older parts of a few American 
cities have buildings close enough together, over a 
large enough area, to fuel this type of conflagration. 
Such fires have not occurred in cities where less than 
about 30% of a large area was covered with 
buildings." 

In the blast area of Hiroshima, a terrifying fire 
storm that burned almost all buildings within an area 
of about 4.4 square miles resulted from many fires 
being ignited almost simultaneously. Many were 
caused by heat radiation from the fireball. Even more 
fires were due to secondary effects of the blast, such 
as the overturning of stoves. The buildings contained 
much wood and other combustible materials. The 
whole area burned like a tremendous bonfire; strong 
winds that blew in from all directions replaced the 
huge volumes of hot air that rose skyward from the 
intense fires. 

Lack of oxygen is not a hazard to occupants of 
shelters in or near burning buildings or to those in 
shelters that are closed tightly to prevent the entry of 
smoke or fallout. Carbon monoxide, toxic smoke 
from fires, or high concentrations of carbon dioxide 

from shelter occupants' exhaled breaths would kill 
occupants before they suffered seriously from 'ack of 
oxygen. 

FIRES IGNITED BY HEAT RADIATION 

.1 shows a wood-frame house after .; 
was heated for one second by heat radiation from c, 
small nuclear weapon exploded in a Nevada test.. This 
test house had no furnishings, but the uox was 
intense enough to have ignited exposed upholstery. 
curtains, bedding, papers, etc. in a typical home. 

Heat radiation will set fire to easily ignitable 
materials (dry newspapers, thin dark fabrics, dry 
leaves and dry grass) in about the same extensive 
areas over which blast causes moderate damage to 
frame houses. The blast wave and high-speed bias? 
winds will blow out many flames. However, tests 
have shown that fire will continue to smolder within 
some materials such as upholstery and dry rotted 
wood, and after a while it often will burst into flame 
and will spread. The burning automobile pictured in 
.2 is an example of such ignition beyond the 
range of severe blast damage. 

The number of fires started by heat radiation in 
areas where blast is not severe can be reduced by 
whitewashing the insides of window panes and by 
removing flammable materials from places in and 
around houses where heat radiation could reach 
them. Also, occupants of shelters in some homes that 
would be only slightly damaged by blast could move 
quickly to extinguish small fires and throw out 
smoldering upholstered articles before fallout is 
deposited. 

Preceding page blank 

49 

50 

FiX^fe^ 

.1. Keat radiation charred the paint on this house, which had been painted white to reflect heat rays. 
The charring instantaneously produced the smoke. However, precautions had been taken to prevent this typical 
U.S. house from being destroyed by fire, because the test was made to enable engineers to study the effects of 
blast, rather than fire. The house was demolished by the 5-psi overpressure blast that struck seconds later, but it 
did not burn. 

5-N® 

fii" 

.2. Thermal radiation from a nuclear explosion entered the car above through its closed windows and 
ignited the upholstery. The windows were blown out by the blast a few seconds later. However, the explosion was 
at such a distance that the blast wave was not. severe enough to dent the car body. 

Earth-covered shelters can he protected against 
heat radiation from nuclear explosions and other 
causes by painting any exposed wood and other 
combustible materials at shelter openings with a 
thick coating of slaked lime (old-fashioned white- 
wash). The World War II firebombing of Kassel was 
less effective than were similar raids on other German 
cities because the roof timbers of buildings had been 
so treated. 20 

.3 illustrates the effectiveness of a thick 
coating of slaked lime in protecting a rough pine 
board against ignition by heat radiation. No flames 
from the burning logs touched the board. (Before this 
photograph was taken, the uppermost burning logs 
of a vertical-sided pile were removed so that the 
board could be seen clearly.) 

Chinese civil defense instructions recommend 
coating exposed wood with both slaked lime and 
mud.21 If only mud is available, a coating of it 
protects wood quite well. If kept damp, a mud 
coating is even more effective. (Simply keeping all 
exposed flammable materials damp is helpful.) 

In blast areas, cloth or plastic canopies over the 
openings of expedient shelters usually would be 
ignited by the heat and certainly would be blown 
away by even moderate blast winds. If extra canopies 
and stakes could be made and kept inside the shelter, 
these replacements could be quickly erected after 
blast winds subside and before fallout begins—at 
least 15 minutes after the explosion. If no spare 
canopies were available, it would be best to keep the 
available canopies and their stakes inside the shelter, 
if it were not raining. 

FOREST AND BRUSH FIRES 

Unless forests or brushy areas are dry, it is 
difficult to start even scattered fires. Dangerous mass 
fires would be unlikely, except in biar; areas where 
the heat radiation would be very intense. However, 
people building a shelter would do well to select a 
shelter site at least as faraway from trees as the heigh: 
of the tallest tree that could fall on the shelter—oe- 
cause of fire and smoke hazards in dry weather, and 
because digging a shelter among tree roots is difficult. 

.3. Heat radiation had ignited the flaming half of the board on the ground, while the half near the 

shovel—painted white with a thick coating of slaked lime—had not even begun to smoke. 

52 

CAUSES OF FIRE 

.4 pictures the same house shown in .1 after it had been struck by the blast effects of a 
small nuclear test explosion at the 5-psi overpressure 
range. (If the house had been hit by the blast effects of 
a multimegaton weapon, with longer-lasting blast 
winds, it would have been wrecked about as 
completely at the 3-psi overpressure range. At the 
3-psi overpressure range, the blast winds from an 
explosion 1000 times as powerful as the Nevada test 
explosion that wrecked this house would blow 10 
times as long. This longer-duration, 100-mph blast 
wind would increase the damage done by the blast 
wave. The 3-psi overpressure range from a 20- 
megaton surface burst is about 10 miles from the 
center of the crater, and from a one-megaton surface 
burst, about 4 miles.6) 

If the blast-wrecked house shown in the 
illustration had had a furnace in operation when it 
was demolished, the chances of its being set on fire 
would have been high. In Hiroshima many of the first 
fires resulted from secondary effects of blast, 
especially the overturning of stoves, and not from 
heat radiation. Although the air burst produced no 
fallout, firefighters from undamaged, nearby com- 
munities were unable to reach most of the burning 
areas because of blast debris blocking the roads. 
Later they were kept from burning areas by the 
intense heat. Some water mains were broken, which 
made water unavailable for firefighting in certain 
areas. 

In the event of an attack on the United States 
employing many surface bursts, fallout would 
prevent firefighting for days-to-weeks in a large part 
of the most populated regions. 

The basements of many substantial buildings 
will withstand 5-psi blast effects and can prevent 
occupants from suffering serious injuries from blast. 
Most home basements can be reinforced with stout 
boards and posts so as to give good protection 
against blast effects up to considerably higher than 
5 psi. But considering the dangers of fires in prob- 
able blast areas, it is safer to build an earth-covered 
shelter well removed from buildings than it is to 
seek protection in shelters inside buildings. 

CARBON MONOXIDE AND TOXIC SMOKE 

If an undamaged building is burning, people 
inside ma;y be killed by carbon monoxide, toxic 
smoke, or fiery-hot air. Tests have shown that even 
fast-burning, 'rubble-free fires produce very high 
concentrations of carbon monoxide. If large-scale 
fires are burning near a shelter, the dangers from both 
carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide may continue 
for as long as 1 '/2 hours after ignition.22 Therefore, the 
ventilation pipes or openings of a shelter should not 
be placed close to a building that might be expected 
to burn. 

In the smoldering rubble of a large test fire, after 
24 hours the carbon monoxide concentration was 
still more than 1% and the air temperature was 

.4. Unburned wreckage of the same two-story, wood-frame house pictured in .1 after being 

wrecked by the 5-psi blast effects of a small nuclear test explosion. 

1900° F. A carbon monoxide concentration of only 
0.08% (8 parts CO in 10,000 parts of air) will cause 
headache, dizziness, and nausea in 45 minutes, and 
total collapse in 2 hours. . 

Realization of carbon monoxide dangers to 
persons in simple fallout shelters and basements may 
have led the writers of Soviet civil defense publica- 
tions to define the "zone of total destruction" as the 
blast areas where the overpressure exceeds 7 psi and 
"residential and industrial buildings are completely 
destroyed ... the rubble is scattered and covers the 
burning structures," and "As a result the rubble only 
smolders, and fires as such do not occur.' 
Smoldering fires produce more carbon monoxide 
than do fiercely burning fires. Whether or not the 
occupants of basement shelters survive the direct 
blast effects is of little practical importance in those 
blast areas where the rubble overhead burns or 
smolders. So in the "zone of complete destruction," 
Russian rescue brigades plan to concentrate on 
saving persons trapped inside excellent blast shelters 
by the rubble. 

About 135,000 Germans lost their lives in the 
tragic city of Dresden during three days of firebomb 
raids. Most casualties were caused by the inhalation 
of hot gases and by carbon monoxide and smoke 

poisoning.20 Germans learned that when these 
dangers were threatening an air raid shelter, the 
occupants' best chance of survival was to run outside, 
even if the bombs were stiil falling. But in a nuclear 
war the fallout dose rate may be so high that the 
occupants of a shelter threatened by smoke and 
carbon monoxide might suffer a more certain and 
worse death by going outside. Instead, if they know 
from instrument readings and their calculations that 
they probably would receive a fatal dose before they 
could reach another shelter, the occupants should 
close all openings as tightly as possible. With luck, 
carbon monoxide in deadly concentrations would 
not reach them, nor would they be overcome by heat 
or their own respiratory carbon dioxide before the 
fire dangers ended. 

Dr. A Broido, a leading experimenter with fires 
and their associated dangers, reached this conclu- 
sion: "If I were building a fallout shelter I would 
spend a few extra dollars to build it in my backyard 
rather than in my basement, locating the intake vent 
as far as possible from any combustible material. In 
such a shelter I would expect to survive anything 
except the close-in blast effects." 

This advice also applies to expedient shelters 

built during a crisis. 

Chapter 8 
Water 

WATER AND SALT REQUIREMENTS 

Painful thirst has been experienced by very few 
Americans. We take for granted that we will always 
have enough water to drink. Most of us think of 
"food and water" in that order, when we think of 
survival essentials that should be stored. But if 
unprepared citizens were confined in a shelter by 
heavy fallout, they soon would realize that they 
should have given first priority to storing adequate 
water. 

For the kidneys to eliminate waste products 
effectively, the average person needs to drink enough 
water so that he urinates at least one pint each day. 
(When water is not limited, most people drink 
enough to urinate 2 pints. Additional water is lost in 
perspiration, exhaled breath, and excrement.) Under 
cool conditions, a person could survive for weeks on 3 
pints of water a day—if he eats but little food and if 
that food is low in protein. Cool conditions, however, 
would be the exception in crowded belowground 
shelters occupied for many days. Under such 
circumstances four or five quarts of drinking water 
per day are essential in very hot weather, with none 
allowed for washing. For a two-week shelter stay, 15 
gallons per person should be stored in or close to a 
shelter. This amount usually would provide for some 
water remaining after two weeks, to prevent thirst in 
case fallout dangers were to continue. 

In a 1962 Navy shelter occupancy test lasting two 
weeks, 99 sailors each consumed an average of 2.4 
quarts (2.3 liters) of water per day.15 The test was 
conducted in August near Washington, D.C.; the 
weather was unseasonably cool. The shelter was not 
air-conditioned except during the last two days of the 
test. 

When one is sweating heavily and not eating 
salty food, salt deficiency symptoms—especially 
cramping—are likely to develop within a few days. 
To prevent this, 6 or 8 grams of salt (about ],U oz, or '/: 
tablespoon) should be consumed daily in food and 
drink. If little or no food is eaten, this small daily salt 
ration should be added to drinking water. Under hot 
conditions, a little salt makes water taste better. 

CARRYING WATER 

Most families have only a few large containers 
that could be used for carrying water to a shelter and 
storing it in adequate amounts for several weeks. 
Polyethylene trash bags make practical expedient 
water containers when used as waterproof liners 
inside smaller fabric bags or pillowcases. (Plastic 
bags labeled as being treated with insecticides or 
odor-controlling chemicals should not be used.) 
.1 shows a teenage boy carrying over 10 
gallons (more than 80 pounds) of water, well 
balanced front and back for efficient packing. Each 
of his two burlap bags is lined with two 20-gallon 
polyethylene trash bags, one inside the other. (To 
avoid possible pinhole leakage it is best to put one 
waterproof bag inside another.) 

To close a plastic bag of water so that hardly any 
will leak out, first spread the top of the bag until the 
two inner sides of the opening are together. Then fold 
in the center so that the folded opening is 4 
thicknesses, and smooth (see .2). Continue 
smoothly folding in the middle until the whole 
folded-up opening is only about 1'/: inches wide. 
Then fold the top of the bag over on itself so the 
folded-up opening points down. With a strip of cloth 
or a soft cord, bind and tie the folded-over part with a 
bow knot, as illustrated. 

55 

56 

PHOTO 12:1s ; 

^i^;«gr^ 

.1. Carrying 80 pounds of water in two 
burlap bags, each lined with two larger plastic trash 
bags, one inside the other. 

ORNL-OWG 78-7JOS 

.2. Folding and tying the mouth of a 

water-filled plastic bag. 

For long hikes, it is best to tie the water-holding 
plastic bags so that the openings are higher than the 
water levels inside. 

To transport this type of expedient water bag in 
a vehicle, tie a rope around the fabric outer bag near 
its opening, so that the rope also encircles and holds 
the plastic liner-bags just below their tied-shut 
openings. The other end of this rope should then be 
tied to some support, to keep the openings higher 
than the water level. 

To use two fabric bags or pillowcases to carry a 
heavy load of water contained in larger plastic liner- 
bags, connect the two fabric bags as shown in .1. 

A small pebble, a lump of earth, or a similar 
object should be tied inside the opening of each bag 
before the two are tied together, to hold them 
securely. The bag that is to be carried in front should 

have the pebble tied about 4 inches further down 
from the edge of its opening than the pebble tied in 
the bag to be carried in back. This keeps the pebbles 
from being pressed against the carrier's shoulder by a 
heavy load. 

A pair of trousers with both legs tied shut at the 
bottoms can be used to carry a balanced load if 
pillowcases or other fabric bags are not at hand. Such 
a balanced ioad can be slung over the shoulder with 
the body erect and less strained than if the same 
weight were carried in a single bag-like pack on the 
back. However, trouser legs are quite narrow and do 
not provide room to carry more than a few gallons. 

To prevent water from slowly leaking through 
the tied-shut openings of plastic bags, the water levels 
inside should be kept below the openings. 

STORING WATER 

When storing expedient water bags in a shelter, 
the water levels inside should be kept below the 
openings. 

Not many expedient shelters would be large 
enough to store an adequate volume of water for an 
occupancy lasting two or more weeks. Plastic-lined 
storage pits, dug in the earth close to the shelter, are 
dependable for storing large volumes of water using 
cheap, compact materials. .3 shows a 
cylindrical water-storage pit dug so as to have a 
diameter about two inches smaller than the inflated 

ORNL-DWG 77-I0423R 

,NWIRE HOOP TAPED 

INTO FOLDED-OVER 
EDGE OF 30-go! 
POLYETHYLENE 
TRASH BAG 
(18 in. DIAM IF 
FULLY EXPANDED). 
DOUBLE BAGS 
ARE BETTER. 

.3. Vertical section of cylindrical water- 
storage pit lined with two 30-gallon waterproof 
plastic bags. This pit held about 20 gallons. 

diameter of the two 30-gal!on polyethylene trash bags 
lining it (one bag inside the other). Before a plastic 
bag is placed in such a pit. the ends of roots should be 
cut off flush to the wall with a sharp knife, and sharp 
rocks should be carefully removed. 

The best way to keep the upper edges of the pit- 
lining bags from slipping into the pit is shown in .3: Make a circular wire hoop the size of the opening 
of the bag, and tape it inside the top. In firm ground, 
the upper edges of double bags have been 
satisfactorily held in place simply by sticking six large 
nails through the turned-under edges of the bags and 
into the firm earth. 

.3 shows how to roof and cover a water 
storage pit so as to protect the water. The "buried 
roof" of waterproof material prevents any contami- 
nation of the stored water by downward-percolating 
rainwater, which could contain bacteria or small 
amounts of radioactive substances from fallout. The 
thick earth cover over the flexible roofing gives 
excellent blast protection, due to the earth arching 
that develops under blast pressure. In a large Defense 
Nuclear Agency blast test, a filled water-storage pit of 
the size illustrated was undamaged by blast effects at 
an overpressure range which could demolish the 
strongest aboveground buildings (53 psi). 

A simpler way to store water is illustrated in .4. If the soil is so unstable that an unshored water 
storage pit with vertical sides cannot be dug, the 
opening of the bag (or of one bag placed inside 
another) can simply be tied shut so as to minimize 
leakage (see ,4). Fill the bag with water, tie it, 
and place it in the pit. Then bury it with earth to the 
level of the water inside. A disadvantage of this 
method is leakage through the tied-shut openings due 
to pressure of loose earth on the bag. To lessen 
leakage, leave an air space between the filled bag and 
a: roofing of board or sticks, so that the weight of 
earth piled on top of the roofing will not squeeze the 
bag. This storage method has another disadvantage- 
after the earth covering and the roof are removed, it is 
difficult to bail out the water for use—because as 
water is bailed out, the loose surrounding earth 
moves inward and squeezes the bag above the 
lowered water level. 

:mT 

"***& 

.4. These two 30-gallon polyethylene trash 
bags, one inside the other, held 16 gallons of water. 
They were undamaged by 50-psi blast effects while 
buried in dry, very light soil. The plywood roof and 
the earth placed over the water bag were removed 
before this picture was taken. 

.5. Post-blast view of plastic-lined water- 
storage pit undamaged at a 6.7-psi overpressure 
range. This pit held about 200 gallons. 

Large volumes of water can be stored in plastic- 
lined rectangular pits. In order to roof them with 
widely available materials such as ordinary %-inch 
plywood or small poles, the pits should be dug no 
wider than 3 feet. .5 pictures such a pit: 8 feet 

long, 27 inches wide, and 30 inches deep. It was lined 
with a 10-foot-wide sheet of 4-mil polyethylene. The 
edges of this plastic sheet were held in place by 
placing them in shallow trenches dug near the sides of 
the pit and covering them with earth. Earth was 

58 

mounded over the plywood roof to a depth of about 
30 inches, with a "buried roof of polyethylene. The 
earth cover and its "buried roof" were similar to the 
pit covering illustrated by .3. This rectangular 
pit contained about 200 gallons of water. No water 
leaked out after the pit had been subjected to blast 
effects severe enough to have flattened most 
substantial buildings. However, rectangular pits at 
higher overpressures failed, due to sidewall caving 
that caused leaks. 

In a subsequent blast test by Boeing Aerospace 
Company, a plastic-lined water pit was undamaged at 
the 200-psi overpressure range. This storage pit had 
dimensions similar to the one pictured in .5, 
including the 4-ft-wide plywood roof, but the top of 
its lined pit was 2 feet below ground level, and the pit 
was completely filled with water. The roof of the pit 
was covered with 2 feet of earth. 

Plastic garbage cans are usually watertight; 
most used metal garbage cans are not. If thoroughly 
cleaned and disinfected with a strong chlorine bleach 
solution, watertight garbage cans can serve for 
emergency water storage, as can some wastebaskets. 
If new plastic film is available, it. can be used as a 
lining to waterproof any. strong box. To lessen the 
chances of the plastic being punctured, rough 
containers first should be lined with fabric. 

If shelter is to be taken in or near a building, 
water trapped in hot water heaters and toilet flush 
tanks or stored in tubs might be available after an 
attack. 

SIPHONING 

Pouring water out of a heavy water-storage bag 
is inconvenient and often results in spillage. Dipping 
it out can result in contamination. If a tube or piece of 
flexible garden hose is available, siphoning (see .6) is the best way. A field-tested method is described 
below. To prevent the suction end of the tube from 
being obstructed by contact with,the plastic liner of 
the bag, tape or tie a wire "protector" to the end, as 
pictured later in this section. 

Water can be siphoned from a covered water 
storage pit into a belowground shelter so that the 
siphon will deliver running water for weeks, if 
necessary. The Utah family mentioned earlier 
siphoned all they needed of the 120 gallons of water 
stored in a nearby lined pit. A field-tested method of 
siphoning follows: 

ORNL-DWG 78-14676 

.6. Using a tube to siphon water from a 

fabric bag lined with a larger plastic bag. 

1. Dig the water storage pit far enough away 
from the shelter so that the covering mounds will not 
interfere with drainage ditches. 

2. Use a flexible tube or hose which is no more 
than 25 feet long. For a single family, a flexible 
rubber tube with an inside diameter of '/4 inch (such as 
surgical tubing) would be best. A flexible '/:-inch hose 
of the type used with mobile homes and boats serves 
well. As indicated by .7, the tube should be long 
enough to extend from the bottom of the water pit to 
within about a foot of the shelter floor. 

3. Make sure that the end in the water pit will 
not press against plastic and block the flow of water. 
This can be avoided by (1) making and attaching a 
wire "protector" to the end of the tube, as shown in 
.8, or (2) taping or tying the end to a rock or 
other object, to keep the end in the desired position. 

4. Protect the tube by placing it in a trench 
about 4 inches deep. This small trench is best dug 
before roofing either the storage pit or the shelter. Be 
sure a roof pole or board does not. crush the tube. 
Cover the tube with earth and tie it so that the end in 

"BURIED ROOFS" 
OF PLASTIC FILM 

:9 

ORNL-DWG 78-11471 

PLASTIC OR CLOTH 
OVER ROOF POLES, 
BOARDS, OR PLYWOOD 

WATER STORAGE 
PIT LINED WITH 
PLASTIC FILM 

.7. Water siphoned into a belowground shelter. 

7. Exhale, and suck again, repeating until you 
feel a good flow of water into your mouth while still 
sucking. Shut off the flow by bending the tube double 
before taking it out of your mouth. 

8. Quickly lower the end of the tube (which is 
now full of water) and place the closed end in a 
container on the shelter floor. Finally, open the end 
to start the siphoned flow. 

9. When you have siphoned enough water, stop 
the flow by bending the tube double. Keep it closed in 
the doubled-over, air-tight position with a strong 
rubber band or string, as shown in .8. To 
prevent loss of water by accidental siphoning, 
suspend the end of the tube a couple of inches higher 
than the surface of the water in the storage pit outside 
and close to where the tube comes into the shelter. 
(Despite precautions, air may accumulate in the 
highest part of the tube, blocking a siphoned flow and 
making it necessary to re-start the siphoning by 
repeating the sucking.) 

DISINFECTING WATER 

Water-borne diseases probably would kill more 
survivors of a nuclear attack than would fallout- 
contaminated water. Before an attack, if water from a 
municipal source is stored in expedient containers 
that could be unclean, it should be disinfected. For 
long storage, it is best to disinfect all water, since even 
a few organisms may multiply rapidly and give stored 
water a bad taste or odor. 

.8. Two wire "protectors," each made of 
two pieces of coathanger wire taped to a '/2-inch 
flexible hose and a rubber tube. Shown on the right is 
a tube closed with a rubber band to stop a siphoned 
flow of water. 

the storage pit cannot be accidentally pulled out of 
position. 

5. To start the flow of water into the shelter, 
hold the free end of the tube at about the height of the 
surface of the water in the storage pit, while pulling 
gently on the tube so that the part in the shelter is 
practically straight. Exhale as much breath as you 
can, then place the end of the tube in your mouth, and 
suck hard and long. (The longer the tube or hose and 
the larger its diameter, the more times you will have 
to suck to start the flow of water.) 

6. Without taking the tube out of your mouth, 
shut it off airtight by bending it double near the end. 

Any household bleach solution, such as Clorox, 
that contains sodium hypochlorite as its only active 

60 

ingredient may be used as a source of chlorine for 
disinfecting. The amount of sodium hypochlorite, 
usually 5.25%, is printed on the label. (In recent years, 
perhaps as a precaution against drinking undiluted 
chlorine bleach solution, some household bleach 
containers show a warning such as "Not For Personal 
Use." This warning can be safely disregarded if the 
label states that the bleach contains only sodium 
hypochlorite as its active ingredient, and if only the 
small quantities specified in these and other instruc- 
tions are used to disinfect water.) Add 1 scant 
teaspoonful to each 10 gallons of clear water, and stir. 
Add 2 scani teaspoonfuls if the water is muddy or 
colored. Wait at least 30 minutes before drinking, to 
allow enough time for the chlorine to kill al! the 
microorganisms.24 Properly disinfected water should 
have a slight chlorine odor. 

To disinfect small quantities of water, put 2 
drops of household bleach containing 5.25% sodium 
hypochlorite in each quart of clear water. Use4drops 
if the v/ater is muddy or colored.21 If a dropper is not 
available, use a spoon and a square-ended strip of 
paper or thin cloth about % inch wide by 2 inches 
long. Put the strip in the spoon with an end hanging 
down about V: inch beyond the end of the spoon. 
Then when bleach is placed in the spoon and the 
spoon is carefully tipped, drops the size of those from 
a medicine dropper will drip off the end of the strip. 

As a second choice, 2% tincture of iodine can be 
used. Add 5 drops to each quart of clear water, and let 
stand 30 minutes.24 If the water is cloudy, add 10 
drops to each quart. Commercial water purification 
tablets should be used as directed. 

If neither safe water nor chemicals for 
disinfecting it are available during a crisis, store 
plenty of the best water at hand—even muddy river 
water. Most mud settles to the bottom in a few days; 
even in a crowded shelter ways often could be found 
to boil water. Bringing water to a boil for one minute 
kills all'types of disease-causing bacteria." Boiling 
for 10 to 20 minutes is required to kill some rarer 
infective organisms. 

has been exhausted, other sources should be located. 
The main water sources are given below, with the 
safest source listed first and the other sources listed in 
decreasing order of safety. 

1. Water from deep wells and from water tanks 
and covered reservoirs into which no fallout particles 
or fallout-contaminated water has been introduced. 
(Caution: Although most spring water would be safe, 
some spring water is surface water that has flowed 
into and through underground channels without 
having been filtered.) 

2. Water from covered seepage pits or shallow, 
hand-dug wells. This water is usually safe IF fallout 
or fallout-contaminated surface water has been 
prevented from entering by the use of waterproof 
coverings and by waterproofing the surrounding 
ground to keep water from running down outside the 
well casing. .9 is taken from a Chinese civil 
defense manual.21 It shows a well dug to obtain safe 
water from a fallout-contaminated source. If the 
earth is not sandy, gravelly, or too porous, filtration 
through earth is very effective. 

3. Contaminated water from deep lakes. Water 
from a deep lake would be much less contaminated by 
dissolved radioactive material and fallout particles 
than water from a shallow pond would be, if both had 
the same amount of fallout per square foot of surface 
area deposited in them. Furthermore, fallout parti- 
cles settle to the bottom more rapidly in deep lakes 
than in shallow ponds, which are agitated more by 
wind. 

4. Contaminated water from shallow ponds and 

other shallow, still water. 

5. Contaminated water from streams, which 
would be especially dangerous if the stream is muddy 
from the first heavy rains after fallout is deposited. 

SOURCES OF WATER IN FALLOUT AREAS ^#===:-^= 

Survivors of a nuclear attack should realize that 
neither fallout particles nor dissolved radioactive 
elements or compounds can be removed from water 
by chemical disinfection or boiling. Therefore, water 
should be obtained from the least radioactive sources 
available. Before a supply of stored drinking water 

.9. A water-filtering well. This Chinese 
drawing specifies that this well should be dug 5 to i Ö 
meters (roughly 5 to 10 yards) from a pond or stream. 

The first runoff will contain most of the radioactive 
material that can be dissolved from fallout particles 
deposited on the drainage area."' Runoff after the 
first few heavy rains following the deposit of fallout is 
not likely to contain much dissolved radioactive 
material, or fallout. 

6. Water collected from fallout-contaminated 
roofs. This would contain more fallout particles than 
would the runoff from the ground. 

7. Water obtained by melting snow that has 
fallen through air containing fallout particles, or 
from snow lying on the ground onto which fallout has 
fallen. Avoid using such water for drinking or 
cooking, if possible. 

WATER FROM WELLS 

The wells of farms and rural homes would be the 
best sources of water for millions of survivors. 
Following a massive nuclear attack, the electric 
pumps and the pipes in wells usually would be useless. 
Electric power in most areas would be eliminated by 
the effects of electromagnetic pulse (EMP) from 
high-altitude bursts and by the effects of blast and fire 
on power stations, transformers, and transmission 
lines. However, enough people would know how to 
remove these pipes and pumps from wells so that bail- 
cans could be used to reach water and bring up 
enough for drinking and basic hygiene. 

How to make a simple bail-can is illustrated in 
.10. An ordinary large fruit-juice can will serve, 
if its diameter is at least 1- inch smaller than the 

ORNL-DWG 78*691 R 

CIRCULAR, UNATTACHED 
VALVE ABOUT 3/4 in. LESS 
IN DIAMETER THAN THE 
CAN 

A CAN TOP 
WITH 4-mil 
PLASTIC FILM 
TAPED ON, 
FOR TIGHT 
SEAL (OR A 
PIECE OF 
INNERTUBE 
RUBBER) 

.10. Lower part of an expedient bail-can. 
The unattached, "caged" valve can be made of a 
material that does not have the springiness of soft 
rubber. 

61 

diameter of the well-casing pipe. A hole about 1 inch 
in diameter should be cut in the center of the can's 
bottom. The hole should be cut from the inside of the 
can: this keeps the inside of the bottom smooth, so it 
will serve as a smooth seat for a practically watertight 
valve. To cut the hole, stand the can on a flat wood 
surface and press down repeatedly with the point of a 
sheath knife, a butcher knife, or a sharpened 
screwdriver. 

The best material for the circular, unattached 
valve shown in .10 is soft rubber, smooth and 
thin, such as inner-tube rubber. Alternately, the lid of 
a can about 3/4 inch smaller in diameter than the bail- 
can may be used, with several thicknesses of plastic 
film taped to its smooth lower side. Plastic film about 
4 mils thick is best. The bail (handle) of a bail-can 
should be made of wire, with a loop at the top to 
which a rope or strong cord should be attached. 

Filling-time can be reduced by taping half-a- 
pound of rocks or metal to the bottom of the bail-can. 

REMOVING FALLOUT PARTICLES AND 
DISSOLVED RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL 
FROM WATER 

The dangers from drinking fallout- 
contaminated water could be greatly lessened by 
using expedient settling and filtration methods to 
remove fallout particles and most of the dissolved 
radioactive material. Fortunately, in areas of heavy 
fallout, less than 2% of the radioactivity of the fallout 
particles contained in the water would become 
dissolved in water.25 If nearly all the radioactive 
fallout particles could be removed by filtering or 
settling methods, few casualties would be likely to 
result from drinking and cooking with most fallout- 
contaminated water. 

• Filtering 

Filtering through earth removes essentially all of 
the fallout particles and more of the dissolved 
radioactive material than does boiling-water distilla- 
tion, a generally impractical purification method that 
does not eliminate dangerous radioactive iodines. 
Earth filters are also more effective in removing 
radioactive iodines than are ordinary ion-exchange 
water softeners or charcoal filters. In areas of heavy 
fallout, about 99% of the radioactivity in water could 
be removed by filtering it through ordinary earth. To 
make the simple, effective filter shown in .11, 
the only materials needed are those found in and 

62 

ORNL DWG 77-18431 

POROUS 
CLOTH 

■•-PEBBLES 

■ST",'.' IC^^g■J^?i5Z?L,*/.%SL 

1$ : ^ —f- NAIL 

HOLES 
IN CAN 

STICKS 
OVER 
PAN 

EXPEDIENT FILTRATION 

.11. Expedient filter to remove 

radioactivity from water. 

around the home. This expedient filter can be built 
easily by proceeding as follows: 

1. Perforate the bottom of a 5-gallon can, a 
large bucket, a watertight wastebasket, or a similar 
container with about a dozen nail holes. Punch the 
holes from the bottom upward, staying within about 
2 inches of the center. 

2. Place a layer about ll/2 inches thick of washed 
pebbles or small stones on the bottom of the can. If 
pebbles are not available, twisted coat-hanger wires 
or small sticks can be used. 

3. Cover the pebbles with one thickness of 
terrycloth towel, burlap sackcloth, or other quite 
porous cloth. Cut the cloth in a roughly circular 
shape about 3 inches larger than the diameter of the 
can. 

4. Take soil containing some clay—almost any 
soil will do—from at least 4 inches below the surface 
of the ground. (Nearly all fallout particles remain 
near the surface except after deposition on sand or 
gravel.) 

5. Pulverize the soil, then gently press it in layers 
over the cloth that covers the pebbles, so that the 
cloth is held snugly against the sides of the can. Do 
not use pure clay (not porous enough) or sand (too 
porous). The soil in the can should be 6 to 7 inches 
thick. 

6. Completely cover the surface of the soil layer 
with one thickness of fabric as porous as a bath towel. 
This is to keep the sou from being eroded as water is 
poured into the filtering can. The cloth also will 
remove some of the particles from the water. A dozen 
small stones placed on the cloth near its edges will 
secure it adequately. 

7. Support the filter can on rods or sticks placed 
across the top of a container that is larger in diameter 
than the filter can. (A dishpan will do.) 

The contaminated water should be poured into 
the filter can, preferably after allowing it to settle as 
described below. The filtered water should be 
disinfected by one of the previously described 
methods. 

If the 6 or 7 inches of filtering soil is a sandy clay 
loam, the filter initially will deliver about 6 quarts of 
clear water per hour. (If the filtration rate is faster 
than about 1 quart in 10 minutes, remove the upper 
fabric and recompress the soil.) After several hours, 
the rate will be reduced to about 2 quarts per hour. 

When the filtering rate becomes too slow, it can 
be increased by removing and rinsing the surface 
fabric, removing about '/S inch of soil, and then 
replacing the fabric. The life of a filter is extended and 
its efficiency increased if muddy water is first allowed 
to settle for several hours in a separate container, as 
described below. After about 50 quarts have been 
filtered, rebuild the filter by replacing the used soil 
with fresh soil. 

• Settling 

Settling is one of the easiest methods to remove 
most fallout particles from water. Furthermore, if the 
water to be used is muddy or murky, settling it before 
filtering will extend the life of the filter. The 
procedure is as follows: 

1. Fill a bucket or other deep container three- 

quarters full of the contaminated water. 

2. Dig pulverized clay or clayey soil from a 
depth of four or more inches below ground surface, 
and stir it into the water. Use about a 1-inch depth of 

63 

dry clay or dry clayey soil for every 4-inch depth of 
water. Stir until practically all the clay particles are 
suspended in the water. 

3. Let the clay settle for at least 6 hours. The 
settling clay particles will carry most of the suspended 
fallout particles to the bottom and cover them. 

4. Carefully dip out or siphon the clear water, 

and disinfect it. 

• Settling and Filtering 

Although dissolved radioactive material usually 
is only a minor danger in fallout-contaminated water, 
it is safest to filter even the clear water produced by 
settling, if an earth filter is available. Finally—as 
always—the water should be disinfected. 

POST-FALLOUT REPLENISHMENT 
OF STORED WATER 

When fallout decays enough to permit shelter 
occupants to go out of their shelters for short periods, 
they should try to replenish their stored water. An 
enemy may make scattered nuclear strikes for weeks 
after an initial massive attack. Some survivors may be 
forced back into theiV shelters by the resultant fallout. 
Therefore, all available water containers should be 
used to store the least contaminated water within 
reach. Even without filtering, water collected and 
stored shortly after the occurrence of fallout will • 
become increasingly safer with time, due particularly 
to the rapid decay of radioactive iodines. These 
would be the most dangerous contaminants of water 
during the first few weeks after an attack. 

Chapter 9 
Food 

MINIMUM NEEDS 

The average American is accustomed to eating 
regularly and abundantly. He may not realize that 
for most people food would not be essential for 
survival during the first two or three weeks following 
a nuclear attack. Exceptions would be infants, small 
children, and the aged and sick, some of whom might 
die within a week without proper nourishment. Other 
things are more important for short-term survival: 
adequate shelter against the dangers from blast and 
fallout, an adequate supply of air, and enough 
water. 

The average American also may not realize that 
small daily amounts of a few unprocessed staple 
foods would enable him to survive for many months, 
or even for years. A healthy person—if he is deter- 
mined to live and if he learns how to prepare and 
use whole-grain wheat or corn—can maintain his 
health for several months. If beans are also available 
and are substituted for some of the grain, the ration 
would be improved and could maintain health for 
many months. 

The nutritional information given in this chapter 
is taken from a July, 1979 publication, Maintaining 
Nutritional Adequacy During a Prolonged Food 
Crisis.21' This book brings together from worldwide 
sources the nutritional facts needed to help unpre- 
pared people use unaccustomed foods advanta- 
geously during the prolonged crisis that would follow 
a heavy nuclear attack. The practical know-how 
which will be given in this chapter regarding the 
expedient processing and cooking of basic grains 
and beans is based on old ways which are mostly 
unknown to modern Americans. These methods have 
been improved and field-tested by civil defense 
researchers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 

LOSS OF HIGH-PROTEIN ANIMAL FOODS 

A massive nuclear attack would eliminate the 
luxurious, complicated American system of food 
production, processing, and distribution. Extensive, 
heavy fallout and the inability of farmers to feed 
their animals would kill most of the cattle, hogs, and 
chickens that are the basis of our high-protein diet. 
The livestock most likely to survive despite their 
owners' inability to care for them would be cattle on 
pasture. However, these grazing animals would 
swallow large numbers of fallout particles along with 
grass, and many would drink contaminated water. 
Their digestive tracts would suffer severe radiation 
damage.27 Also, they would suffer radiation burns 
from fallout particles. Thus in an outdoor area where 
the total dose from gamma radiation emitted within 
a few days from fallout particles on the ground might 
be only 150 R, most grazing animals probably would 
be killed by the combined effects of external gamma- 
ray radiation, beta burns, and internal radiation. 

PRECAUTIONS WHEN EATING MEAT 

In areas where the fallout would not be enough 
to sicken animals, their meat would be safe food. In 
fallout areas, however, animals that have eaten or 
drunk fallout-contaminated food or water will have 
concentrated radioactive atoms and molecules in 
their internal organs. The thyroid gland, kidneys, 
and liver especially should not be eaten. 

If an animal appears to be sick, it should not be 
eaten. The animal might be suffering from a sickening 
or fatal radiation dose and might have developed a 
bacterial infection as a result of this dose. Meat 
contaminated with the toxins produced by some 
kinds of bacteria could cause severe illness or death 
if eaten, even if thoroughly cooked. 

Preceding page blank 

65 

66 

Under crisis conditions, all meat should be 
cooked until it is extremely well done—cooked long 
past the time when it loses the last of its pink color. 
To be sure that the center of each piece of meat is 
raised to boiling temperature, the meat should be cut 
into pieces that are less than '/2-inch thick before 
cooking. This precaution also reduces cooking time 
and saves fuel. 

and cesium from fallout-contaminated soil. Over the 
first 30 years following an attack, this increase would 
be a small fraction of the number of additional cancer 
deaths that would result from external radiation.29 
Cancer deaths would be one of the tragic, delayed 
costs of a nuclear war, but all together would not be 
numerous enough to endanger the long-term survival 
of the population. 

SURVIVAL OF BREEDING STOCK 

LIVE OFF THE LAND? 

Extensive areas of the United States would not 
receive fallout heavy enough to kill grazing animals. 
The millions of surviving animals would provide 
some food and the fertile breeding stock needed for 
national recovery. The loss of fertility caused by 
severe radiation doses is rarely permanent. Extensive 
experiments with animals have shown that the 
offspring of severely irradiated animals are healthy 
and fertile.27 

Very few survivors of a heavy attack would be 
in areas where they could live off the land like 
primitive hunters and gatherers. In extensive areas 
where fallout would not be heavy enough to kill 
human beings, wild creatures would die from the 
combined effects of external gamma radiation, 
swallowed fallout particles, and beta burns on their 
bodies. Survival plans should not include dependence 
on hunting, fishing, or gathering wild plants. 

LIVING ON BASIC PLANT FOODS 

FOOD FOR SHELTER OCCUPANTS 

Even if almost all food-producing animals were 
lost, most surviving Americans should be able to 
live on the foods that enable most of the world's 
population to live and multiply: grains, beans, and 
vegetables. And because of the remarkable produc- 
tivity of American agriculture, there usually would 
be enough grain and beans in storage to supply 
surviving Americans with sufficient food for at least 
a year following a heavy nuclear attack.28 The 
problem would be to get the unprocessed foods, 
which are stored in food-producing regions, to the 
majority of survivors who would be outside these 
regions. 

Surprisingly little transportation would be 
needed to carry adequate quantities of these un- 
processed foods to survivors in famine areas. A single 
large trailer truck can haul 40,C00 pounds of 
wheat—enough to keep 40,000 people from feeling 
hunger pains for a day. More than enough such 
trucks and the fuel needed to carry basic foods to 
food-short areas would survive a massive nuclear 
attack. 8 It is likely that reasonably strong American 
leadership and morale would prevail so that, after 
the first few weeks, millions of the survivors in 
starving areas should receive basic unprocessed 
foods. 

Eating food produced in the years after a large 
attack would cause an increase in the cancer rate, 
due primarily to its content of radioactive strontium 

Most people would need very little food to live 
several weeks; however, the time when survivors 
of blast and fallout would leave their shelters would 
mark the beginning of a much longer period of 
privation and hard manual labor. Therefore, to 
maintain physical strength and morale, persons in 
shelters ideally should have enough healthful food 
to provide well-balanced, adequate meals for many 
weeks. 

In most American homes there are only enough 
ready-to-eat, concentrated foods to last a few days. 
Obviously, it would be an important survival ad- 
vantage to keep on hand a two-week supply of easily 
transportable foods. In any case, occupants of 
shekers would be uncertain about when they could 
get more food and would have to make hard decisions 
about how much to eat each day. (Those persons 
who have a fallout meter, such as the homemade 
instrument described in Chapter 10, could estimate 
when and for how long they could emerge from 
shelter to find food. As a result, these persons could 
ration their limited foods more effectively.) 

During the first few weeks of a food crisis, lack 
of vitamins and other essentials of a well-balanced 
diet would not be of primary importance to pre- 
viously well-nourished people. Healthful foods with 
enough calories to provide adequate energy would 
meet short-term needs. If water is in short supply, 
high-protein foods such as meat are best eaten only 

in moderation, since a person eating high-protein 
foods requires more water than is needed when 
consuming an equal number of calories from foods 
high in carbohydrates. 

EXPEDIENT PROCESSING OF GRAINS 
AND SOYBEANS 

Whole-kernel grains or soybeans cannot be 
eaten in sufficient quantities to maintain vigor and 
health if merely boiled or parched. A little boiled 
whole-kernel wheat is a pleasantly chewy breakfast 
cereal, but experimenters at Oak Ridge got sore 
tongues and very loose bowels when they tried to eat 
enough boiled whole-kernel wheat to supply even 
half of their daily energy needs. Even the most 
primitive peoples grind or pound grains into a meal 
or paste before cooking. (Rice is the only important 
exception.) Few Americans know how to process 
whole-kernel grains and soybeans (our largest food 
reserves) into meal. This ignorance could be fatal 
to survivors of a nuclear attack. 

Making an expedient metate, the hollowed-out 
grinding stone of Mexican Indians, proved im- 
practical under simulated post-attack conditions. 
Pounding grain into meal with a rock or a capped, 
solid-ended piece of pipe is extremely slow work. 
The best expedient means developed and field-tested 
for pounding grain or beans into meal and flour is 
an improvised 3-pipe grain mill. Instructions for 
making and using this effective grain-pounding 
device follow. 

Improvised Grain Mill 

The grain mill described can efficiently pound 
whole-grain wheat, corn, etc., into meal and 
flour—thereby greatly improving digestibility and 
avoiding the diarrhea and sore mouths that would 
result from eating large quantities of unground 
grain. 

TO BUILD: 

(1) Cut 3 lengths of pipe, each 30 inches long; 
%-inch-diameter steel pipe (such as ordinary 
water pipe) is best. 

(2) Cut the working ends of the pipe off squarely. 
Remove all roughness, leaving the full-wall 
thickness. Each working end should have the full 
diameter of the pipe. 

(3) In preparation for binding the three pieces of 
pipe together into a firm bundle, encircle each 

67 

piece of pipe with cushioning, slip-prevent- 
ing tape, string or cloth—in the locations 
illustrated. 

(4) Tape or otherwise bind the 3 pipes into a secure 
bundle so that their working ends are as even as 
possible and are in the same plane—resting 
evenly on a flat surface. 

(5) Cut the top smoothly out of a large can. A 
4-inch-diameter, 7-inch-high fruit-juice can is 
ideal. If you do not have a can, improvise some- 
thing to keep grain together while pounding it. 

0RNL-0WG 73-11449 

SLIP- 
PREVENTING 
TAPE OR 
STRING 
AROUND 
EACH PIPE 

ir~i 

TAPE OR 
STRING 
BINDING ALL 
3 PIPES 
TOGETHER 

30 in. 

'fin. OF GRAIN IN A CAN RESTING ON 
A HARD. SMOOTH. SOLID SURFACE 

TO MAKE MEAL AND FLOUR: 

(1) Put clean, dry grain ONE INCH DEEP in the 

can. 

(2) To prevent blistering your hands, wear gloves, 
or wrap cloth around the upper part of the 
bundle of pipes. 

(3) Place the can (or open-ended cylinder) on a hard, 

smooth, solid surface, such as concrete. 

(4) To pound the grain, sit with the can held between 
your feet. Move the bundle of pipes straight 
up and down about 3 inches, with a rapid 
stroke. 

(5) If the can is 4 inches in diameter, in 4 minutes 
you should be able to pound '/2 lb (one cup) of 
whole-kernel wheat into '/$ lb of fine meal and 
flour, and 3/m lb of coarse meal and fine-cracked 
wheat. 

(6) To separate the pounded grain into fine meal, 
flour, coarse meal, and fine-cracked wheat, use 
a sieve made of window screen. 

(7) To separate flour for feeding small children, 
place some pounded grain in an 18 X 18-inch 
piece of fine nylon net, gather the edges of the 
net together so as to hold the grain, and shake 
this bag-like container. 

(8) To make flour fine enough for babies, pound fine 
meal and coarse flour still finer, and sieve it 
through a piece of cheesecloth or similar 
material. 

As soon as fallout decay permits travel, the 
grain-grinding machines on tens of thousands of hog 
and cattle farms should be used for milling grain for 
survivors. It is vitally important to national recovery 
and individual survival to get back as soon as possible 
to labor-saving, mechanized ways of doing essential 
work- 

in an ORNL experiment, a farmer used a 
John Deere Grinder-Mixer powered by a 100-hp 
tractor to grind large samples of wheat and barley. 
When it is used to grind rather coarse meal for hogs. 
this machine is rated at 12 tons per hour. Set to grind 
a finer meal-flour mixture for human consumption, 
it ground both hard wheat and feed barley at a rate 
of about 9 tons per hour, This is 2400 times as fast 
as using muscle power to operate even the best ex- 
pe'dient grain mill. With its finest screen installed, 
this large machine can produce about 3 tons of whole 
wheat flour per hour. 

Unlike wheat and corn, the kernels of barley, 
grain sorghums, and oats have rough, fibrous hulls 

that must be removed from the digestible parts to 
produce an acceptable food. Moistening the grain 
will toughen such hulls and make them easier to 
remove. If the grain is promptly pounded or ground 
into meal, the toughened hulls will break into larger 
pieces than will the hulls of undampened grain. A 
small amount of water, weighing about 2% of the 
weight of the grain, should be used to dampen the 
grain. For 3 pounds of grain (about 6 cups), sprinkle 
with about one ounce (28 grams, or about 2 
tablespoons) of water, while stirring constantly to 
moisten all the kernels. After about 5 minutes of 
stirring, the grain will appear dry. The small amount 
of water will have dampened and toughened the 
hulls, but the edible parts inside will have remained 
dry. Larger pieces of hull are easier to remove after 
grinding than smaller pieces. 

One way to remove ground-up hulls from meal 
is by flotation. Put some of the meal-hulls mixture 
about 1 inch deep in a pan or pot, cover the mixture 
with water, and stir. Skim off the floating hulls, 
then pour off the water and more hulls. Sunken pieces 
of hulls that settle on top of the heavier meal can be 
removed with one's fingers as the last of the water 
is poured off. To produce a barley meal good for 
very small children, the small pieces of hulls must 
again be separated by flotation. 

.1 illustrates sieving fine, dry barley- 
meal and the smaller pieces of hulls from the coarser 

ijs*4$0&- 

:*\ 

> 

.1. Sieving ground barley through a window- 

screen sieve. 

meal and the larger pieces. The sieve was made of 
a piece of window screen that measured 20 X 20 
inches before its sides were folded up and wired to 
form an open-topped box. 

To lessen their laxative effects, all grains should 
be ground as finely as possible, and most of the hulls 
should be removed. Grains also will be digested more 
easily if they are finely ground. The occupants of 
crowded shelters should be especially careful to avoid 
foods that cause diarrhea. 

COOKING WITH MINIMUM FUEL 

In areas of heavy fallout, people would have to 
remain continuously in crowded shelters for many 
days. Then they would have to stay in the shelters 
most of each 24 hours for weeks. Most shelter 
occupants soon would consume all of their ready- 
to-eat foods; therefore, they should have portable, 
efficient cook stoves. A cook stove is important for 
another reason: to help maintain morale. Even in 
warm weather, people need some hot food and drink 
for the comforting effect and to promote a sense 
of well-being. This is particularly true when people 
are under stress. The Bucket Stove pictured on the 
following pages (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3) w*as the most 
satisfactory of several models of expedient stoves 
developed at Oak Ridge and later field-tested. 

® Bucket Stove 

If operated properly, this stove burns only about 
'/: pound of dry wood or newspaper to heat 3 quarts 
of water from 60° F to boiling. 

Materials required for the stove: 

* A metal bucket or can, 12- to 16-quart sizes 
preferred. The illustrations show a 14-quart bucket 
and a 6-quart pot. 

* Nine all-metal coat hangers for the parts 
made of wire. (To secure the separate parts of the 
movable coat-hanger wire grate, 2 feet of finer wire 
is helpful.) 

* A 6 X 10-inch piece of a large fruit-juice 

can, for a damper. 

Construction: 

With a chisel (or a sharpened screw driver) and 
a hammer, cut a •4'/: X 4'/2-inch hole in the side of 
the bucket about 1'/: inches above its bottom. To 
avoid denting the side of the bucket when chiseling 
out the hole, place the bucket over the end of a log or 
similar solid object. 

69 

To make the damper, cut a 6-inch-wide by 
10-inch-high piece out of a large fruit-juice can or 
from similar light metal. Then make the two coat- 
hanger-wire springs illustrated, and attach them to 
the piece of metal by bending and hammering the 
outer 1 inch of the two 6-inch-long sides over and 
around the two spring wires. This damper can be slid 
up and down, to open and close the hole in the 
bucket. The springs hold it in any desired position. (If 
materials for making this damper are not available, 
the air supply can be regulated fairly well by placing 
a brick, rock, or piece of metal so that it will block 
off part of the hole in the side of the bucket.) 

To make a support for the pot, punch 4 holes 
in the sides of the bucket, equally spaced around it 
and about 3'/i inches below the bucket's top. Then 
run a coat-hanger wire through each of the two pairs 
of holes on opposite sides of the bucket. Bend these 
two wires over the top of the bucket, as illustrated, so 
that their four ends form free-ended springs to hold 
the cooking pot centered in the bucket. Pressure on 
the pot from these four free-ended, sliding springs 
does not hinder putting it into the stove or taking 
it out. 

Bend and twist 4 or 5 coat hangers to make the 
movable grate, best made with the approximate 
dimensions given in .2. 

For adjusting the burning pieces of fuel on the 
grate, make a pair of 12-inch-long tongs of coat- 
hanger wire, as illustrated. 

To lessen heat losses through the sides and 
bottom of the bucket, cover the bottom with about 
1 inch of dry sand or earth. Then line part of the inside 
and bottom with two thicknesses of heavy-duty 
aluminum foil, if available. 

To make it easier to place the pot in the stove 
or take it out without spilling its contents, replace the 
original bucket handle with a longer piece of strong 
wire. 

Operation: 

The Bucket Stove owes its efficiency to: (1) the 
adjustable air supply that flows up through the 
burning fuel, (2) the movable grate that lets the 
operator keep the maximum amount of flame in 
contact with the bottom of the cooking pot, and 
(3) the space between the sides of the pot and the 
inside of the bucket that keeps the rising hot gases 
in close contact with the sides of the pot. 

In a shelter, a Bucket Stove should be placed 
as near as practical to an air exhaust opening before 
a fire is started in it. 

70 

%^%^: 

CAUTION: OPERATE THIS STOVE ONLY NEAR 

OPENINGS WHERE EITHER NATURAL OR 
PUMPED VENTILATION IS CAUSING AIR TO 
LEAVE THE SHELTER. 

DO NOT OPERATE IN A CLOSED 

STRUCTURE. 

.2. Bucket-stove with adjustable damper and movable w ire grate. 

.3. Bucket-stove with its sliding damper partly closed. Foot-long tongs of coat hanger wire 

are especially useful when burning twisted half-pages of newspaper. 

72 

If wood is to be burned, cut and split dry wood 
into small pieces approximately % inch square and 
6 inches long. Start the fire with paper and small 
slivers of wood, placing some under the wire grate. 
To keep fuel from getting damp in a humid shelter, 
keep it in a large plastic bag. 

If newspaper is to be burned, use half-pages 
folded and twisted into 5-inch-long "sticks," as 
illustrated. Using the wire tongs, feed a paper "stick" 
into the fire about every half-minute. 

Add fuel and adjust the damper to keep the 
flame high enough to reach the bottom of the pot, 
but not so high as to go up the sides of the 30t. 

To use the Bucket Stove for heating in very 
cold weather, remove the pot and any insulation 
around the sides of the bucket; burn somewhat more 
fuel per minute. 

If used with the Fireless Cooker described on 
the following pages, a Bucket Stove can be used 
to thoroughly cook beans, grain, or tough meat 
in water. Three quarts of such food can be cooked 
with less fuel than is required to soft-boil an egg 
over a small campfire. 

® Fireless Cooker 

A Fireless Cooker cooks by keeping a lidded 
pot of boiling-hot food so well insulated all around 
that it loses heat very slowly. .4 shows one 
of these simple fuel-saving devices made from a 
bushel basket filled with, insulating newspapers, 
with a towel-lined cavity in the center. The cavity is 
the size of the 6-quart pot. A towel in this cavity goes 
all around the pot and will be placed over it to restrict 
air circulation. If the boiling-hot pot of food is then 
covered with newspapers about 4 inches thick, the 
temperature will remain for hours so near boiling 
that in 4 or 5 hours even slow-cooking food will be 
ready to eat. 

The essential materials for making an effective 
Fireless Cooker are enough of any good insulating 
materials (blankets, coats, paper, hay that is dry and 
pliable) to cover the boiling-hot pot all over with at 
least 3 or 4 inches of insulation. A container to keep 
the insulating materials in place around the pot is 
useful. 

Wheat, other grains, and small pieces of tough 
meat can be thoroughly cooked by boiling them 
briskly for only about 5 minutes, then insulating 
the pot in a Fireless Cooker for 4 or 5 hours, or 

.4. Boiling-hot pot of food being placed in 

an expedient Fireless Cooker. 

overnight. Whole beans should be boiled for 10 to 
15 minutes before they are placed in a Fireless 
Cooker. 

COOKING GRAIN AND BEANS WHEN 
SHORT OF FUEL OR POTS 

® Cooking Grain Alone 

When whole grains are pounded or ground by 
expedient means, the result usually is a mixture of 
coarse meal, fine meal, and a little flour. Under 
shelter conditions, the best way to cook such meal 
is first to bring the water to a boil (3 parts of water 
for 1 part of meal). Add 1 teaspoon (5 grams) of salt 
per pound of dry meal. Remove the pot from the fire 
(or stop adding fuel to a Bucket Stove) and quickly 
stir the meal into the hot water. (If the meal is stirred 
into briskly boiling water, lumping becomes a worse 
problem.) Then, while stirring constantly, again 
bring the pot to a rolling boil. Since the meal is just 
beginning to swell, more unabsorbed water remains, 
so there is less sticking and scorching than if the meal 
were added to cold water and then brought to 
a boil. 

If any type of Fireless Cooker is available, the 
hot cereal only has to be boiled and stirred long 
enough so that no thin, watery part remains. This 
usually takes about 5 minutes. Continue to cook, 
either in the Fireless Cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours, 
or by boiling for an additional 15 or 20 minutes. 

When it is necessary to boil grain meal for many 
minutes, minimize sticking and scorching by cook- 
ing 1 part of dry meal with at least 4 parts of water. 
However, cooking a thinner hot cereal has a dis- 
advantage during a food crisis: an increased volume 
of food must be eaten to satisfy one's energy 
needs. 

If grain were the only food available, few 
Americans doing physical work could eat enough 
of it to maintain their weight at first, until their 
digestive tracts enlarged from eating the very bulky 
foods. This adaptation could take a few months. 
Small children could not adjust adequately to an 
all-grain diet; for them, concentrated foods such as 
fats also are needed to provide enough calories to 
maintain growth and health. 

© Cooking Grain and Beans Together 

When soybeans are being used to supplement 
the lower quality proteins of grain and when fuel or 
pots are in short supply, first grind or pound the 
beans into a fine meal. To further reduce cooking 
time, soak the bean meal for a couple of hours, 
keeping it covered with water as it swells. Next put 
the soaked bean meal into a pot containing about 
3 times as much water as the total volume of the bean 
meal and the dry grain meal. Gently boil the bean 
meal for about 15 minutes, stirring frequently. 

Stop boiling and add the grain meal while 
stirring constantly. Again bring the pot to a boil, 
stirring to prevent sticking and scorching, and boil 
until the meal has swelled enough to have absorbed 
all the water. After salting, boil the grain-bean mush 
for another 15 minutes or more before eating, or put 
it in a fireless cooker for at least 4 or 5 hours. 

Soybeans boiled alone have a taste that most 
people find objectionable. Also, whole soybeans 
must be boiled for a couple of hours to soften them 
sufficiently. But if soybeans are pounded or ground 
into a fine meal and then boiled with meal made from 
corn or another grain, they give a sweetish taste to the 
resulting mush. The unpleasant soybean taste is 
eliminated. If cooked as described above, soybeans 
and other beans or dried peas can be made digestible 
and palatable with minimum cooking. 

73 

100% GRAIN AND 100% BEAN DIETS 

A diet consisting solely of wheat, corn, or rice, 
and salt has most pf the essential nutrients. The 
critical deficiencies would be vitamins'A, C, and D. 
Such a grain-based diet can serve adults and older 
children as their "staff of life" for months. .1 
shows how less than 1% pounds of whole wheat 
or dry yellow corn satisfies most of the essential 
nutritional requirements of a long-term emergency 
ration. [The nutritional values that are deficient are 
printed in bold type, to make an easier comparison 
with the Emergency Recommendations, also printed 
in bold type. Food energy is given in kilocalories 
(kcal), commonly called calories (Cal).] Expedient 
ways of supplying the nutrients missing from these 
rations are described in a following section of this 
chapter. 

Other common whole grains would serve about 
as well as wheat and yellow corn. At least \U oz of salt 
per day (about 5 grams) is essential for any ration 
that is to be eaten for more than a few days, but'/.? oz 
(about 10 g or % tablespoon) should be available 
to allow for increased salt needs and to make grain 
and beans more palatable. This additional salt would 
be consumed as needed. 

To repeat: few Americans at first would be able 
to eat the 3 or 4 quarts of thick mush that would be 
necessary with a ration consisting solely of whole- 
kernel wheat or corn. Only healthy Americans 
determined to survive would be likely to fare well 
for months on such unaccustomed and monotonous 
food as an all-grain diet. Eating two or more different 
kinds of grain and cooking in different ways would 
make an all-grain diet both more acceptable and 
more nourishing. 

Not many people would be able to eat 27 oz 
(dry weight before cooking) of beans in a day, and 
fewer yet could eat a daily ration of almost 23 oz 
of soybeans. Beans as single-food diets are not 
recommended because their large protein content 
requires the drinking of more fluids. Roasted peanuts 
would provide a better single-food ration. 

GRAIN SUPPLEMENTED WITH BEANS 

People who live on essentially vegetarian diets 
eat a little of their higher-quality protein food at every 
meal, along with the grain that is their main source 
of nutrition. Thus Mexicans eat some beans along 
with their corn tortillas, and Chinese eat a little 
fermented soybean food or a bit of meat or fish with 
a bowl of rice. Nutritionists have found that grains 

74 

.1. Daily rations of 100% grain, beans, or peanuts" 

Wheat 
(dry) 

Yellow 
Field 
Corn' 
(dry) 

790g 
(27.8 oz) 

750g 
(26.4 oz) 

2600 
103 

15 
324 
1260 
26 
2920 

0 
4.3 
1.0 

34.0 

0 
0 

2600 
67 

29 
155 
1100 
15.7 
2130 

368 
2.8 
0.9 

löy 

0 
0 

Emergency 
Recommendations 

Soybeans 
(dry) 

Red Beans 
(dry) 

Peanuts 
(roasted) 

645g 
(22.7 oz) 

760g 
(26.8 oz) 

447g 
(15.8 oz) 

2600 
55' 

30 
400 
200-300 
10 
1500-2000 

555 
1.0 • 
1.4 

17.0 

15-30 
0' 

2600 
220 

114 
1458 
1710 
54.2 
10800 

52 
7.1 
2.0 

14.2 

0 
0 

2600 
171 

11 
836 
1240 
52.4 
7420 

15 
3.9 
1.5 

17.5 

0 
0 

2600 
117 

218 
322 
782 
9.8 
3132 

0 
1.3 
0.6 

76.4 

0 
0 

Weight 

Energy, kcal 
Protein, g 

Fat, g 
Calcium, mg 
Magnesium, mg 
Iron, mg 
Potassium, mg 

Vitamin A, RE 
Thiamin, mg 
Riboflavin, mg 

Niacin, mg 

Vitamin C, mg 
Vitamin D, pg 

"Salt ('/.i oz, or 10 g, or % tablespoon) should be available. This would be consumed as needed. 
''White corn supplies no Vitamin A, whereas yellow corn supplies 49 RE (retinol equivalent, a measure of Vitamin A value) 

per 100 g dry weight. Most corn in the United States is yellow corn. 

' If a diet contains some animal protein such as meat, eggs, or milk, the recommended protein would be less than 55 g per day. 

If most of the protein is from milk or eggs, only 41 g per day is recommended. 

'The niacin in corn is not fully available unless the corn is treated with an alkali, such as the lime or ashes Mexicans (and 

many Americans) add to the water in which corn kernels are soaked or boiled. 

'Although adults do not need vitamin D, infants, children, and pregnant and lactating women should receive 10 Mg 

(10 micrograms). 

are low in some of the essential amino acids that 
the human body needs to build its proteins. For 
long-term good health, the essential amino acids 
must be supplied in the right proportions with each 
meal by eating some foods with more complete 
proteins than grains have. Therefore, in a prolonged 
food crisis one should strive to eat at every meal at 
least a little of any higher-quality protein foods that 
are available. These include ordinary beans, 
soybeans, milk powder, meat, and eggs. 

.2 shows that by adding 7.0 oz (200 g) 
of red beans (or other common dried beans) to 21.1 oz 
(600 g) of either whole w' r.t or yellow corn, with 
salt added, you can produce rations that contain 
adequate amounts of all the important nutrients 
except vitamin C, vitamin A, vitamin D, and fat. If 
5.3 oz (150 g) of soybeans are substituted for the red 
beans, the fat requirement is satisfied. The 600 g of 
yellow corn contains enough carotene to enable the 
body to produce more than half the emergency 
recommendation of vitamin A. The small deficiencies 
in riboflavin would not cause sickness. 

Other abundant grains, such as grain sorghums 
or barley, may be used instead of the wheat or corn 
shown in .2 to produce fairly well-balanced 
rations. Other legumes would serve to supplement 
grain about as well as red beans. (Peanuts are the 
exception: although higher in energy (fat) than any 
other unprocessed food, the quality of their protein 
is not as high as that of other legumes.) 

EXPEDIENT WAYS TO SUPPLY DEFICIENT 
ESSENTIAL NUTRIENTS 

© Vitamin C 

A deficiency of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) causes 
scurvy. This deadly scourge would be the first 
nutritional disease to afflict people having only grain 
and/ or beans and lacking the know-how needed to 
sprout them and produce enough vitamin C. Within 
only 4 to 6 weeks of eating a ration containing no 
vitamin C, the first symptom of scurvy would appear: 
swollen and bleeding gums. This would be followed 
by weakness, then large bruises, hemorrhages, and 

.2. Daily rations of whole wheat or yellow corn supplemented with soybeans or red beans. 
Recommended daily salt ration, including salt in food: % tablespoon (3/3 oz, or 10 g). 

600g(2I.l oz) 

600g (21.1 oz) 

Whole wheat plus Whole wheat plus 

200g (7.0 oz) 
Red beans (dry wt) 

ISOg (5.3 oz) 
Soybeans (dry wt) 

Emergency 
Recommendations 

600g (21.1 oz) 
Yellow corn" plus 
150g(5.3 oz) 

600g (21.1 oz) 
Yellow corn plus 
200g (7.0 oz) 

Soybeans (dry wt) Red beans (dry wt 

Energy, kcal 
Protein, g 
Fat, g 

Calcium, mg 
Magnesium, mg 
Iron, njg 

Potassium, mg 
Vitamin A, RE 
Thiamin, mg 

Riboflavin, mg 
Niacin, mg 
Vitamin C, mg 
Vitamin D, ßg 

2,666 
123 
15 

466 
1,286 
33.6 

4,188 
4 
4.3 

1.1 
30.4 
0 
0 

2,585 
129 
39 

585 
1,358 
32.4 

4,736 
12 
5.0 

1.2 
29.1 
0 
0 

2.600 
55" 
30 

400 
200-300 
10 

1,500-2.000 
555 
1.0 

1.4 
17.0 
15-30 
0J 

2,693 
105 
50 

471 
1,280 
25.2 

4,220 
306 
3.9 

1.2 
16.5' 
0 
0 

2,774 
98 
26 

:52 
! 208 
26.4 

• 3,672 
298 
3.2 

1.1 
17.8 
0 
0 

"White corn supplies no vitamin A, whereas yellow coin supplies 49RE (retinol equivalent, a measure of vitamin A value) 

per 100g dry weight. Most corn in the United States is yellow corn. 

''If a diet contains animal protein such as meat, eggs or milk, the recommended protein would be less than 55g per day. If all 

the protein is from milk or eggs, only 41g per day is required. 

'The niacin in corn is not fully available unless corn is treated with an alkali, such as the lime or ashes added by Mexicans 

and Americans in the South and Southwest to the water in which they soak or boil corn kernels. 

''Although adults do not need vitamin D, infants, children, and pregnant and lactating women should receive 10 ^xg 

(10 micrograms). 

wounds that would not heal. Finally, death from 
hemorrhages and heart failure would result. 

One good expedient way to prevent! or cure 
scurvy is to eat sprouted seeds—not just the sprouts. 
Sprouted beans prevented scurvy during a famine in 
India. Captain James Cook was able to keep his 
sailors from developing scurvy during a three-year 
voyage by having them drink daily an unfermented 
beer made from dried, sprouted barley. For centuries 
the Chinese have prevented scurvy during the long 
winters of northern China by consuming sprouted 
beans. 

Only 10 mg of vitamin C taken each day ('/s of 
the smallest vitamin C tablet) is enough to prevent 
scurvy. If a little over an ounce (about 30 grams) of 
dry beans or dry wheat is sprouted until the sprouts 
are a little longer than the seeds, the sprouted seeds 
will supply 10 to 15 mg of vitamin C. Such sprouting, 
if done at normal room temperature, requires about 
48 hours. To prevent sickness and to make sprouted 
beans more digestible, the sprouted seeds should be 
boiled in water for not longer than 2 minutes. Longer 
cooking will destroy too much vitamin C. 

Usual sprouting methods produce longer 
sprouts than are necessary when production of 
enough vitamin C is the objective. These methods 
involve rinsing the sprouting seeds several times a 
day in safe water. Since even survivors not confined 
to shelters are likely to be short of water, the method 
illustrated in .5 should be used. First the seeds 
to be sprouted are picked clean of trash and broken 
seeds. Then the seeds are covered with water and 
soaked for about 12 hours. Next, the water is drained 
off and the soaked, swollen seeds are placed on the 
inside of a plastic bag or a jar, in a layer no more than 
an inch deep. If a plastic bag is used, you should 
make two loose rolls of paper, crumble them a little, 
dampen them, and place them inside the bag, along 
its sides. As shown in .5, these two dampened 
paper rolls keep the plastic from resting on the seeds 
and form an air passage down the center of the bag. 
Wet paper should be placed in the mouth of the bag 
or jar so as to leave an air opening of only about 
1 square inch. If this paper is kept moist, the seeds 
will remain sufficiently damp while receiving enough 
circulating air to prevent molding. They will sprout 
sufficiently after about 48 hours at normal room 
temperature. 

76 

.5. Sprouting with minimum water. 

Sprouting seeds also increases their content 
of riboflavin, niacin, and folic acid. Sprouted beans 
are more digestible than raw, unsprouted beans, but 
not as easily digested or nourishing as are sprouted 
beans that have been boiled or sauteed for a couple 
of minutes. Sprouting is not a substitute for cooking. 
Contrary to the claims of some health food publi- 
cations, sprouting does not increase the protein 
content of seeds, nor does it improve protein quality. 
Furthermore, sprouting reduces the caloric value of 
seeds. The warmth generated by germinating seeds 
reduces their energy value somewhat, as compared 
to unsprouted seeds. 

• Vitamin A 

Well-nourished adults have enough vitamin A 
stored in their livers to prevent vitamin A deficiency 
problems for several months, even if their diet during 
that time contains none of this essential vitamin. 
Children would be affected by deficiencies sooner 
than adults. The first symptom is an inability to see 
well in dim light. Continuing deficiency causes 
changes in body tissues. In infants and children, 
lack of vitamin A can result in stunted growth and 
serious eye problems—even blindness. Therefore, a 
survival diet should be balanced with respect to 
vitamin A as soon as possible, with children having 
priority. 

Milk, butter, and margarine are common 
vitamin A sources that would not be available to 
most survivors. If these were no loneer available. 

yellow corn, carrots, and green, leafy vegetables 
(including dandelion greens) would be the best 
sources. If these foods were not obtainable, the next 
best source would be sprouted whole-kernel wheat 
or other grains—if seeds could be sprouted for three 
days in the light, so that the sprouts are green. 
Although better than no source, sprouting is not 
a very satisfactory way to meet vitamin A require- 
ments. The development of fibrous roots makes 
3-day sprouted wheat kernels difficult tc eat. And 
one must eat a large amount of seeds with green 
sprouts and roots to satisfy the recommended daily 
emergency requirements—up to 51/: f-ups of 5-day 
sprouted alfalfa seeds. Survivors of a nuclear attack 
would wish they had kept an emergency store of 
multivitamin pills. 

© Vitamin D 

Without vitamin D, calcium is not adequately 
absorbed. As a result, infants and children would 
develop rickets (a disease of defective bone mineral- 
ization). A massive nuclear attack would cut off 
the vast majority of Americans from their main 
source of vitamin D, fortified milk. 

Vitamin D can be formed in the body if the 
skin is exposed to the ultraviolet rays of the sun. 
Infants should be exposed to sunlight very cau- 
tiously, initially for only a few minutes—especially 
after a massive nuclear attack. Such an attack 
possibly could cause atmospheric changes that would 
permit more ultraviolet light to reach the earth's 
surface. In cold weather, maximum exposure of skin 
to sunlight is best done in a shallow pit shielded from 
the wind. 

• Niacin and Calcium 

Niacin deficiency causes pellagra, a disease that 
results in weakness, a rash on skin exposed to the 
sun, severe diarrhea, and mental deterioration. If a 
typical modern American had a diet primarily of 
corn and lacked the foods that normally supply 
niacin, symptoms of pellagra would first appear in 
about 6 months. Since corn is by far our largest 
crop—the U.S. production in 1974 was about 284 
billion pounds—the skillful treatment of corn would 
be important to post-attack survival and recovery. 

During the first part of this century, pellagra 
killed thousands of Americans in the South each 
year. These people had corn for their principal staple 
and ate few animal protein foods or beans. Yet 

Mexicans, who eat even more corn than did those 
Southerners—and have even fewer foods of animal 
origin—do not suffer from pellagra. 

The Mexicans' freedom from pellagra is mainly 
due to their traditional method of soaking and 
boiling their dried corn in a lime-water solution. 
They use either dry, unslaked lime (calcium oxide, a 
dangerously corrosive substance made by roasting 
limestone) or dry, slaked lime (calcium hydroxide, 
made by adding water to unslaked lime). Dry lime 
weighing about 1% as much as the dry corn is added 
to the soak water, producing an alkaline solution. 
Wood ashes also can be used instead of lime to make 
an alkali solution. The alkali treatment of corn makes 
the niacin available to the human body. Tables 9.1 
and 9.2 show corn as having adequate niacin. 
However, the niacin in dried corn is not readily 
available to the body unless the corn has received 
an alkali treatment. 

Treating corn with lime has another nutritional 
advantage: the low calcium content of corn is signifi- 
cantly increased. 

• Fat 

The emergency recommendation for fat is 
slightly over 1 ounce per day (30 g) of fat or cooking 
oil. This amount of fat provides only 10% of the 
calories in the emergency diet, which does not specify 
a greater amount because fats would be in very short 
supply after a nuclear attack. This amount is very low 
when compared to the average diet eaten in this 
country, in which fat provides about 40% of the 
calories. It would be difficult for many Americans to 
consume sufficient calories to maintain normal 
weight and morale without a higher fat intake; more 
fat should be made available as soon as possible. 
Increased fat intake is especially important for young 
children, to provide calories needed for normal 
growth and development. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory field tests have shown that toddlers and 
old people, especially, prefer considerably more oil 
added to grain mush than the emergency recom- 
mendation of 10%. 

• Animal Protein 

Vitamin B-l 2 is the only essential nutrient that is 
available in nature solely from animal sources. Since 
a normal person has a 2 to 4-year supply of vitamin 
B-l2 stored in his liver, a deficiency should not 

develop before enough food of animal origin would 
again be available. 

Many adults who are strict vegetarians keep 
in good health for years without any animal sources 
of food by using grains and beans together. It is 
more difficult to maintain normal growth and 
development in young children on vegetarian diets. 
When sufficient animal sources of food are available, 
enough should be provided to supply 7 grams of 
animal protein daily. This could be provided by 
about 1.4 ounces'(38 g) of lean meat, 0.7 ounce (20 g) 
of nonfat dry milk, or one medium-sized egg. When 
supplies are limited, young children should be given 
priority. Again: a little of these high-grade supple- 
mentary protein foods should be eaten with every 
meal. 

• Iron 

Most people live out their lives without benefit 
of an iron supplement. However, many pregnant 
and nursing women and some children need 
supplemental iron to prevent anemia. One tested 
expedient way to make more iron available is to use 
iron pots and pans, especially for cooking acid foods 
such as tomatoes. Another is to place plain iron nails 
(not galvanized nails) in vinegar until small amounts 
of iron begin to float to the surface. This usually takes 
2 to 4 weeks. Then a teaspoon of iron-vinegar 
solution will contain about 30 to 60 mg of iron, 
enough for a daily supplement. The emergency 
recommendation is 10 mg per day. A teaspoon of the 
iron-vinegar solution is best taken in a glass of water 
The iron content of fruit, such as an apple, can be 
increased by placing iron nails in it for a few days. 

FOOD RESERVES 

Russia, China, and other countries that make 
serious preparations to survive disasters store large 
quantities of food—primarily grain—both in farming 
areas and near population centers. In contrast, the 
usually large U.S. stocks of grain and soybeans are 
an unplanned survival resource resulting from the 
production of more food than Americans can eat or 
sell abroad. The high productivity of U.S. agriculture 
is another unplanned survival asset. Providing 
enough calories and other essential nutriems for 
100 million surviving Americans would necessitate 
the annual raising of only about 16% of our 1974 
crop of corn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans— 
if nothing else were produced. In 1974, the U.S. 

78 

production of corn, wheat, and grain sorghum 
totalled about 408 billion pounds, and that of 
soybeans was 68 billion pounds. A total of 2 pounds 
per person per day of these basic staples, in the 
proportions shown in .2, would be sufficient 
to provide the essentials of an adequate vegetarian 
diet weighing about 27 ounces. (Grain sorghum is not 
listed in .2; it has approximately the same 
food value as corn.) The remaining 5 ounces of the 2 
pounds would feed enough chickens to meet a 
survivor's minimum long-term requirement for 
animal protein. 

If corn, wheat, grain sorghum, and soybeans 
were the only crops raised, the annual production 
would need to be 730 pounds per person. Our 1974 
annual production would have supplied every adult, 
child, and infant in a population of 100 million with 
4760 pounds of these four staples'. This is more than 
6 times enough to maintain good nutrition by 
Chinese standards. i 

Recovery from a massive nuclear attack would 
depend largely on sufficient food reserves being 
available to enable survivors to concentrate on 
restoring the essentials of mechanized farming. 
Enough housing would remain intact or could be 
built to provide adequate shelter for the first few 
crucial years; enough clothing and fabrics would 
be available. But if survivors were forced by hunger 
to expend their energies attempting primitive subsis- 
tence farming, many deaths from starvation would 
occur and the prospects for national recovery 
would be greatly reduced. In view of the crucial 
importance of large food reserves to the prospects 
for individual and national survival, it is to be hoped 

that U.S. food surpluses and large annual carry-overs 
will continue. 

A BASIC SURVIVAL RATION TO STORE 

A ration composed of the basic foods listed 
below in .3 provides about 2600 calories per 
day and is nutritionally balanced. It keeps better 
than a ration of typical American foods, requires 
much less space to store or transport, and is much 
less expensive. The author and some friends have 
stored enough of these basic foods to last their 
families several months during a crisis, and have 
eaten large quantities of these foods with satisfaction 
over the past 20 years. (A different emergency ration 
should be stored for infants and very small children, 
as will be explained in the following section.) Field 
tests have indicated that the majority of Americans 
would find these basic foods acceptable under crisis 
conditions. In normal times, however, no one should 
store this or any other emergency food supply until 
after he has prepared, eaten, and found its compo- 
nents satisfactory. 

Unprocessed grains and beans provide adequate 
nourishment for many millions of the world's people 
who have little else to eat. Dry grains and beans are 
very compact: a 5-gallon can holds about 38 pounds 
of hard wheat. Yet when cooked, dry whole grains 
become bulky and give a well-fed feeling—a distinct 
advantage if it is necessary to go on short rations 
during a prolonged crisis. 

This basic ration has two disadvantages: (1) it 
requires cooking, and (2) Americans are un- 
accustomed to such a diet. Cooking difficulties can 
be minimized by having a grain-grinding device, a 

.3. A basic survival ration for multi-year storage 

Ounces 
per day 

Grams 
per day 

Pounds 
for 30 days 
full ration 

Kilograms 
for 30 days 
full ration 

Whole-kernel hard wheat 

Beans 

Non-fat milk oowder 

Vegetable oil 

Sugar 

Salt (iodized) 

Total Weights 

16 

5 

2 

1 

2 

1; 

26'.3 

454 

142 

57 

28 

57 

10 

748 

30.0 

9.4 

3.8 

1.9 

3.8 

0.63 

49.5 

Multi-vitamin pills: 

1 pill each day 

13.6 

4.3 

1.7 

0.9 

1.7 

0.3 

22.5 

bucket stove with a few pounds of dry wood or 
newspapers for fuel, and the know-how to make a 
"fireless cooker" by using available insulating ma- 
terials such as extra clothing. The disadvantage of 
starting to eat unaccustomed foods at a stressful 
time can be lessened by eating more whole grains 
and beans in normal times—thereby, incidentally, 
saving money and improving a typical American 
diet by reducing fat and increasing bulk and fiber. 

When storing enough of this ration to last for 
several months or a year, it is best to select several 
kinds of beans for variety and improved nutrition. 
If soybeans are included, take into account the dif- 
ferences between soybeans and common beans, as 
noted earlier in this chapter. 

In many areas it is difficult to buy wheat and 
beans at prices nearly as low as the farmer receives 
for these commodities. However, in an increasing 
number of communities, at least one store sells 
whole-grain wheat and beans in large sacks at 
reasonable prices. Mormons, who store food for a 
range of possible personal and national disasters, are 
often the best sources of information about where 
to get basic foods in quantity, at reasonable cost. 
Soon after purchase, bulk foods should be removed 
from sacks (but not necessarily from sealed-plastic 
liner-bags) and sealed in metal containers or in 
thick-walled plastic containers for storage. Especially 
in the more humid parts of the United States, grain 
and beans should be frequently checked for moisture. 
If necessary, these foods should be dried out and 
rid of insects as described later in this chapter. 

Vegetable oil stores as well in plastic bottles as 
in glass ones. The toughness and lightness of plastic 
bottles make them better than glass for carrying 
when evacuating or for using in a shelter. Since a 
pound of oil provides about 2% times as much energy 
as does a pound of sugar, dry grain, or milk powder, 
storing additional vegetable oil is an efficient way 
to improve a grain diet and make it more like the 
40%-fat diet of typical Americans. 

All multivitamin pills providing 5000 Inter- 
national Units (1500 mg retinol equivalent) vitamin 
A, 400 IU (10 mg) of vitamin D, and 50 to 100 mg 
of vitamin C, must meet U.S. Government standards, 
so the least expensive usually are quite adequate. 
Storage in a refrigerator greatly lengthens the time 
before vitamin pills must be replaced with fresh 
ones. Because vitamin C is so essential, yet very 

inexpensive and long-lasting, it is prudent to store 
a large bottle. 

It would be wise to have on hand ready-to-eat, 
compact foods for use during a week or two in a 
shelter, in addition to those normally kept in the 
kitchen. It is not necessary to buy expensive "survival 
foods" or the special dehydrated foods carried by 
many backpackers. All large food stores sell the 
following concentrated foods: non-tat milk powder, 
canned peanuts, compact ready-to-eat iry cereals 
such as Grape Nuts, canned meat and fish, white 
sugar, vegetable oil in plastic bottles, iodized salt, 
and daily multivitamin pills. If shelter occupants 
have a way to boil water (see Figs. 9.2 and 9.3, Bucket 
Stove), it is advisable to include rice, noodles, and an 
"instant" cooked cereal such as oatmeal or 
wheat—along with coffee and tea for those who 
habitually drink these beverages. 

Parched grain is a ready-to-eat food that has 
been used for thousands of years. Whole-kernel 
wheat, corn, and rice can be parched by the following 
method: Place the kernels about '/4-inch deep in a 
pan, a, skillet, or a tin can while shaking it over a 
flame, hot coals, or a red hot electric burner. The 
kernels will puff and brown slightly when parched. 
These parched grains are not difficult to chew and can 
be pounded to a meal more easily than can the raw 
kernels. Parched grain stores well if kept dry and free 
of insects. 

EMERGENCY FOOD FOR BABIES 

Infants and very small children would be the 
first victims of starvation after a heavy nucleat 
attack, unless special preparations are made on their 
behalf. Our huge stocks of unprocessed foods, which 
could prevent the majority of unprepared survivors 
from dying of hunger, would not be suitable for the 
very young. They need foods that are more con- 
centrated and less rough. Most American mothers do 
not nurse their infants, and if a family's supply of 
baby foods were exhausted the parents might ex- 
perience the agony of seeing their baby slowly 
starve. 

Few Americans have watched babies starving. 
In China, I saw anguish on starving mothers' faces 
as they patted and squeezed their flat breasts, trying 
to get a little more milk into their weak babies' 
mouths. I saw this unforgettable tragedy in the midst 
of tens of thousands of Chinese evacuating on foot 
before a ruthless Japanese army during World 
War II. Years later, my wife and I stored several 

80 

hundred pounds of milk powder while our five 
children were small. I believe that parents who fear 
the use of nuclear weapons will be glad to bear the 
small expense of keeping on hand the emergency 
baby foods listed in .4, below. (More de- 
tailed descriptions of these and many other foods, 
with instructions for their use, are given in an Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory report, Maintaining 
Nutritional Adequacy During A Prolonged Food 
Crisis, ORNL-5352, 1979. This report may be 
purchased for S6.50 from National Technical In- 
formation Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
5385 Port Royal Road, Springfield, Virginia 22161.) 

To make a formula adequate for a 24-hour 
period, the quantities of instant non-fat dry milk, 
vegetable cooking oil, and sugar listed in the "Per 
Day" column of .4 should be added to 4 cups 
of safe water. This formula can be prepared daily in 
cooi weather or when a refrigerator is available. 
In warm or hot weather, or under unsanitary con- 
ditions, it is safer to make a formula 3 times a day. 
To do so, add % cup plus 2 teaspoons (a little less 
than one ounce) of instant non-fat milk powder 
to 1'/;, cups (2h pint) of boiled water, and stir 
thoroughly. Then add 3 tablespoon (about'/? ounce, 
or 9 grams) of vegetable oil and 2 teaspoons of sugar, 
and stir. (If regular bakers' milk powder is used, A 
cup is enough when making one-third of the daily 
formula, 3 times a day.) If baby bottles are not at 
hand, milk can be spoon-fed to an infant. 

Especially during a war crisis, the best and 
most dependable food for an infant is mother's 
milk—provided the mother is assured an adequate 
diet. The possibility of disaster is one more reason 

why a mother should nurse her baby for a full year. 
Storing additional high-protein foods and fats for 
a nursing mother usually will be better insurance 
against her infant getting sick or starving than 
keeping adequate stocks of baby foods and the 
equipment necessary for sanitary feeding after 
evacuation or an attack. 

To give a daily vitamin supplement to a baby, a 
multivitamin pill should be crushed to a fine powder 
between two spoons and dissolved in a small amount 
of fluid, so that the baby can easily swallow it. If an 
infant does not receive adequate amounts of vitamins 
A, D, and C, he will develop deficiency symptoms 
in 1 to 3 months, depending on the amounts stored 
in his body. Vitamin C deficiency, the first to appear, 
can be prevented by giving an infant 15 mg of 
vitamin C each day (about '/3 of a 50-mg vitamin C 
tablet, pulverized) or customary foods containing 
vitamin C, such as orange juice. Lacking these 
sources, the juice squeezed from sprouted grains 
or legumes can be used. If no vitamin pills or foods 
rich in vitamin D are available, exposure of the 
baby's skin to sunlight will cause his body to produce 
vitamin D.Tt would be wise to wait about 30 days 
after an attack before exposing the baby to sunlight. 
After that, short exposures would be safe except 
in areas of extremely heavy fallout. As a further 
precaution, the baby can be placed in an open, 
shallow pit that will provide shielding from radiation 
given off by fallout particles on the ground. Initial 
exposure should be very short, no more than 
10 minutes. 

If sufficient milk is not obtainable, even infants 
younger than six months should be given solid food. 
Solid foods for babies must be pureed to a fine 

.4. Emergency food supply for one baby. 

Ingredients 

Per Day 

Per Month 

P -r6 Months 

Volumes and Ounces Grams Pounds Kilograms Pound s K. lograms 

Instant non-fat dry milk 

Vegetable cooking oi 

Sugar 

Standard dailv multi- vitamin 
pills 

1 cup + 2 
tablespoons 
(2% o?) 

3 tablespoons 
(1.07.) 

2 tablespoons 
(0.7 oz) 

';, pill 

8 

6 2.72 

32 

15 

30 

20 

2 0.90 

1.3 0.60 

12 

8 

5.5 

3.6 

10 pills 

60 p ll.s 

texture. Using a modern baby food grinder makes 
pureeing quick and easy work. Under crisis con- 
ditions, a grinder should be cleaned and disinfected 
like other baby-feeding utensils, as described later in 
this section. 

Several expedient methods are available: the 
food can be pressed through a sieve, mashed with 
a fork or spoon, or squeezed through a porous cloth. 
Good sanitation must be maintained; all foods 
should be brought to a boil after pureeing to insure 
that the food is safe from bacteria. 

A pureed solid baby food can be made by first 
boiling together 3 parts of a cereal grain and 1 part 
of beans until they are soft. Then the mixture should 
be pressed through a sieve. The sieve catches the 
tough hulls from the grain kernels and the skins 
from the beans. The grain-beans combination will 
provide needed calories and a well-supplemented 
protein. The beans also supply the additional iron 
that a baby needs by the time he is 6 months old. 
Flours made from whole grains or beans, as pre- 
viously described, also can be used; however, these 
may contain more rough material. 

Some grains are preferable to others. It is easier 
to sieve cooked corn kernels than cooked wheat 
kernels. Since wheat is the grain most likely to cause 
allergies, it should not be fed to an infant until he 
is 6 to 7 months old if other grains, such as rice or 
corn, are available. 

Small children also need more protein than can 
be supplied by grains alone. As a substitute for milk, 
some bean food should be provided at every meal. If 
the available diet is deficient in a concentrated energy 
source such as fat or sugar, a child's feedings should 
be increased to 4 or 5 times a day, to enable him to 
assimilate more. Whenever possible, a small child 
should have a daily diet that contains at least one 
ounce of fat (3 tablespoons, without scraping the 
spoon) This would provide more than 10% of a 
young child's calories in the form of fat, which would 
be beneficial. 

of the bleach is unknown, add 3 teaspoons per quar..) 
Directions for safe feeding without boiiing follow: 

The Utensils (Include at least one I-quart and one 
1-pint mason jar. for keeping prepared 
formula sterile until used.) 

1. Immediately after feeding, wash the inside 
and outside of all utensils used to prepare the formu a 
and to feed the infant. 

•2. Fill a covered container with clean, cold 
water and add the appropriate amour.: of chlorine 
bleach. 

3. Totally immerse all utensils until the next 
feeding (3 or 4 hours). Be sure that the bottle, if used, 
is filled with bleach solution. Keep container 
covered. 

At Feeding Time 

1. Wash hands before preparing food. 

2. Remove utensils from the disinfectant chlo- 

rine solution and drain, but do not rinse or dry. 

3. Prepare formula; feed the baby. 

4. Immediately after feeding, wash utensils in 
clean water and immerse again in the disinfectant 
solution. 

5. Prepare fresh chlorine solution each day. 

STORAGE OF FOODS 

Whole grains and white sugar can be stored 
successfully for decades; dried beans, non-fat milk 
powder, and vegetable oil can be stored for several 
years. Some rules for good storage follow: 

» Keep food dry. The most dependable way to 
assure continuing dryness is to store dry grain in 
metal containers, such as ordinary 5-gallon metal 
storage cans or 55-gallon metal drums with gasketed 
lids. Filled 5-gallon cans are light enough to be easily 
carried in an automobile when evacuating. 

If under emergency conditions it is not practical 
to boil infant feeding utensils, they can be sterilized 
with a bleach solution. Add one teaspoon of ordinary 
household bleach to a quart of water. (Ordinary 
household bleach contains 5.25% sodium hypo- 
chlorite as its only active ingredient and supplies 
approximately 5% available chlorine. If the strength 

Particularly in humid areas, grain which seems 
to be dry often is not dry enough to store for a long 
period. To be sure that grain is dry enough to store 
for years, use a drying agent. The best drying 3genr 
for this purpose is silica gel with color indicator. 
The gel is blue when it is capable of absorbing water 
and pink when it needs to be heated to become an 

82 

effective drying agent again. Silica gel is inexpensive 
if bought from chemical supply firms located in most 
cities. By heating it in a hot oven or in a can over a 
fire until it turns blue again, silica gel can be used 
repeatedly for years. 

The best containers for the silica gel used to 
dry grain (or to determine its dryness) are homemade 
cloth envelopes large enough for a heaping cupful of 
the gel. A clear plastic window should be stitched in, 
through which color changes can be observed. Put 
an envelope of silica ge! on top of the grain in a 
5-gallon can filled to within a couple of inches of its 
top. Then close the can tightly. Even a rather 
loose-fitting lid can be sealed tightly with tape. If after 
a few days the silica gel is still blue, the grain is dry 
enough. If the silica gel has turned pink, repeat the 
process with fresh envelopes until it can be seen that 
the grain is dry. 

• Keep grains and beans free of weevils, other 
insects, and rodents. Dry ice (carbon dioxide) is the 
safest means still widely available to the public for 
ridding grain and beans of insects. Place about 
4 ounces of dry ice on top of the grain in a 5-gallon 
metal container. Put the lid on somewhat loosely, so 
that air in the grain can be driven out of the can. 
(This will happen as the dry ice vaporizes and the 
heavy carbon dioxide gas sinks into the grain and 
displaces the air around the kernels.) After an hour 
or two, tighten the lid and seal it with tape. After 
one month, all insects in this carbon-dioxide 
atmosphere will have died from lack of oxygen. 

• Store foods in the coolest available place, out of 
the light. Remember that the storage life of most 

foods is cut in half by an increase of 18°F (10°C) in 
storage temperature.30 Thus 48 months of storage at 
52° F is equivalent to 24 months at 70° F, and to 
12 months at 88°F. 

Illustrative of the importance of cool storage are 
my experiences in storing non-fat milk powder in an 
earth-covered, cool shelter. In steel drums I stored 
unopened 100-pound bags of compact, non-fat milk 
powder that I bought from bakeries. The cost per 
pound was much less than I would have paid for the 
largest packages sold in supermarkets. After 7 years 
storage at temperatures of about 50° F the year 
around, my milk powder was still good—as good as it 
would have been if stored in a normally air- 
conditioned and heated home for about 3 years. 

« Do not place stored metal containers directly on 
the floor. To avoid possible condensation of mois- 
ture and the rusting that results, place containers 
on spaced boards. For long-term storage in damp 
permanent shelters or damp basements, use solid- 
plastic containers with thick walls. 

o Rotate stored foods. Eat the oldest food of each 
type and replace it with fresh food. Although cooking 
oil and non-fat milk powder remain edible after 
several years of storage at room temperature, these 
and most other dry foods are more nourishing and 
taste better if stored for no more than 2 years. Most 
canned foods taste better if kept no more than one 
year. Exceptions are whole grains and white sugar, 
which stay good for decades if stored properly. 

Chapter 10 
Fallout Meters 

THE CRITICAL NEED 

A survivor in a shelter that does not have a 
dependable fallout meter—or that has one but lacks 
someone who knows how to use it—will face a 
prolonged nightmare of uncertainties. Human beings 
cannot feel, smell, taste, hear, or see fallout radiation. 
A heavy attack would put most radio stations off the 
air, due to the effects of electromagnetic pulse, blast, 
fire, or fallout from explosions. Because fallout 
intensities often vary greatly over short distances, 
those stations still broadcasting would rarely be able 
to give reliable information concerning the con- 
stantly changing radiation dangers around a survi- 
vor's shelter. 

Which parts of the shelter give the best 
protection? How large is the radiation dose being 
received by each person? When is it safe to leave the 
shelter for a few minutes? When can one leave for an 
hour's walk to get desperately needed water? As the 
fallout continues to decay, how long can one safely 
work each day outside the shelter? When can the 
shelter be left for good? Only an accurate, dependable 
fallout meter will enable survivors to answer these 
life-or-death questions. 

Civil defense experts have long recognized the 
central importance of having an adequate number of 
fallout meters and enough people trained to use them 
intelligently. In 1953 the National Academy of 
Sciences' Advisory Committee on Civil Defense 
concluded: "The final effectiveness of shelter depends 
upon the occupants of any shelter having simple, 
rugged, and reliable dose-rate meters to measure the 
fallout dose rate outside the shelter." 

Note that dose-rate meters are specified. A dose- 
rate meter (also called a survey meter) is a fallout 
meter designed to measure the roentgens per hour 

(R/ hr) of fallout radiation to which it is exposed. The 
other important type of fallout meter used in civil 
defense is a dosimeter, which measures the total dose 
(R) to which it has been exposed since being charged, 
or the dose between readings. 

COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE 
FALLOUT METERS 

In 1979 an American does not have many 
choices if he wants to buy an off-the-shelf dose-rate 
meter suitable for measuring the high levels of fallout 
radiation that would result from a nuclear attack. 
Although inexpensive dose-rate meters and dosime- 
ters have been under development by the military 
services and civil defense researchers for the past 10 
years, they have not been produced commercially. 
Field tests of factory-produced models have not been 
completed at this writing. 

An American instrument that satisfies most 
requirements of a wartime fallout meter is the 
Panoramic 470-A Survey Meter. This dose-rate 
meter is manufactured and sold by Victoreen 
Instrument Division, 10101 Woodland Avenue, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44104. It measures dose rates from 1 
mR/ hr to 1000 R/ hr, is powered by 6 small batteries, 
and has modern integrated circuits that prolong 
battery life. The list price in 1979 was S810. Another 
American dose-rate meter is the RO-1 Survey Meter 
of Eberline Instrument Corp., P.O. Box 2108, Santa 
Fe, New Mexico 87501. This instrument measures 
dose rates from 0.2 mR/hr up to 500 R/hr and sold 
for $1125 in 1979. 

A more rugged dose-rate meter, an instrument 
designed for wartime use that measures from 0.01 
mR/ hr to 300 R/ hr, can be purchased from a Finnish 
manufacturer, Wallac Nuclear Instruments, P.O. 

approximately 660,000 dose-rate meters and about 
2,900,000 dosimeters, all suitable for wartime use. In 
1979 almost all these instruments are in good 
working condition. Unfortunately, most of them are 
in cities likely to be targeted, and are kept in existing 
shelters or stored in public buildings. If there were a 
sufficiently long, officially recognized period of 
warning before an attack, a large fraction of these 
fallout meters cculd be moved to locations outside 
areas of probable blast and fire damage and placed in 
officially designated fallout shelters. 

It would be highly desirable for most families to 
have their own fallout meters. This is particularly 
true if they live in a region where chances of surviving 
a nuclear attack are good —or if in a crisis they plan to 
evacuate to such a favorable location. 

A HOMEMADE DOSE-RATE METER 

The only homemade fallout meter that is 
accurate and dependable was invented and thor- 
oughly tested at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.31 It 
is called the Kearny Fallout Meter (KFM); one is 
pictured in .1. This simple electrostatic 
instrument is made with common, inexpensive 
materials found in millions of homes, requires no 

Box 10, 20101 Turku 10, Finland. Including import 
duties, the 1978 cost of the Wallac model RD-8 
Universal Radiation Survey Meter was about S565. 
The author and an associate both have owned Wallac 
RD-8 rate meters for years, with no maintenance 
problems. 

Commercially available dosimeters, which 
record the total dose received between readings, are 
not as expensive. In early 1978, high-range dosime- 
ters retailed for about S70. A dosimeter sold by 
Dosimeter Corporation of America and by Victoreen 
Instrument Division measures doses up to 600 R. 
(Current price information can be obtained by 
writing to Dosimeter Corporation of America at 
P.O. Box 42377, Cincinnati, Ohio 45242 and to 
Victoreen Instrument Division, 10101 Woodland 
Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44104.) 

A battery-powered charger must be used to 
operate all available dosimeters; one charger can be 
used for several of these instruments. A charger can 
be purchased from the same companies for about 
$70. 

When the total dose shown on a dosimeter is 
observed to be increasing rapidly, a high-range 
dosimeter can be used to determine the dose rate, 
although this method is time-consuming. (If a 600 R 
dosimeter is exposed for 30 minutes and records a 
dose of 40 R, the dose rate is40 R + \i2 hr = 80 R/hr.) 

Periodically, all commercially available fallout 
meters should be (1) supplied with fresh batteries. (2) 
checked with a radiation source (preferably each 
year) to see if they are still measuring radiation 
accurately, and (3) repaired if necessary. 

The reader is advised to buy a good commercial 
dose-rate meter with which to quickly measure high 
levels of radiation, if he can afford one. A good 
commercial instrument, if properly maintained and 
calibrated, can be used for many years. However, the 
owner of a single expensive fallout meter would do 
well to make a KFM, the dependable homemade 
fallout meter described in Appendix C, for use as a 
back-up instrument in case of malfunction or 
breakage. 

WARTIME RESERVES OF 
FALLOUT METERS 

One important U.S. asset for surviving a nuclear 
war is the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency's 
supply of fallout meters. These instruments include 

.1. A homemade KFM, an accurate dose- 
rate meter for measuring dose rates from 30 mR/hr 
(0.03 R/hr) up to 43 R/hr. 

radioactive material to calibrate or check for 
accuracy, and needs no battery to operate. Detailed 
instructions that have enabled untrained citizens to 
make and use KFMs are given in Appendix C, along 
with an extra set of the cut-out patterns. 

The preferred materials actually used in a KFM 
cost less than $2.00 in 1978. The materials to make a 
plastic "dry bucket," with a vinyl cover needed for 
charging a KFM in very humid conditions, cost 
about S3.50. In the unlikely event that a householder 
has to go out and buy all the materials needed for a 
KFM and its "dry bucket," it would cost less than 
$11.00. This sum will actually buy most of the 
materials for several KFMs. For example, only 39 
square inches of ordinary aluminum foil is required 
to make the two "leaves" of this simple instrument. In 
1979 ordinary (not "heavy duty") aluminum foil 
made in the United States weighed about 8.2 grams 
per 2 square feet. Variations in the weight of the foil 
used do not affect the accuracy of a KFM nearly as 
much as do changes in the dimensions of this 
instrument. 

ADVICE ON BUILDING A KFM 

The reader is urged to set aside several hours in 
the near future for ma.king a KFM and for mastering 
its use. During field tests, average American families 
have needed about 6 hours to study the instructions 
given in Appendix C, to make this simple instrument, 
and to learn how to use it. These several hours may 
not be available in the midst of a crisis. High, r 
priority work would be the building of a high- 
protection-factor shelter, the making of a shelter- 
ventilating pump, and the storing of adequate water. 
In a crisis it might not be possible to obtain some 
needed materials for a KFM. 

It is very difficult to concentrate on unfamiliar 
details during a nerve-racking crisis, or to do delicate 
work with hands that may become unsteady. The best 
time to build and learn to use a KFM is in peacetime, 
long before a crisis. Then this long-lasting instrument 
should be stored for possible future need. 

Chapter 11 
Light 

THE NEED FOR MINIMUM LIGHT 
» 

Numerous disasters have proved that most 
people can remain calm for several days in total 
darkness. But some occupants of a shelter full of 
fearful people probably would go to pieces if they 
could see nothing and could not get out. It is easy to 
imagine the impact of a few hysterical people on the 
other occupants of a pitch-dark shelter. Under 
wartime conditions, even a faint light that shows only 
the shapes of nearby people and things can make the 
difference between an endurable situation and a 
black ordeal. 

.1 shows what members of the Utah 
family saw in their shelter on the third night of 
occupancy. All of the family's flashlights and other 
electric lights had been used until the batteries were 
almost exhausted. They had no candles at home and 

failed to bring the cooking oil, glass jar. and cotton 
string included in the Evacuation Checklist. These 
materials would have enabled them to make an 
expedient lamp and to keep a small light burning 
continuously for weeks, if necessary. 

At 2 AM on the third night, the inky blackness 
caused the mother, a stable woman who had never 
feared the dark, to experience her first claustro- 
phobia. In a controlled but tense voice she suddenly 
awoke everyone by stating: "I have to get out of here. 
I can't orient myself." Fortunately for the shelter- 
occupancy experiment, when she reached the entry 
trench she overcame her fears and lay down to sleep 
on the floor near the entrance. 

Conclusion: In a crisis, it is especially bad not to 

be able to see at all. 

ELECTRIC LIGHTS 

Even in communities outside areas of blast, fire, 
or fallout, electric lights dependent on the public 
power system probably would fail. Electromagnetic 
pulse effects produced by the nuclear explosions, plus 
the destruction of power stations and transmission 
lines, would knock out most public power. * 

No emergency lights are included in the supplies 
stocked in official shelters. The flashlights and 
candles that some people would bring to shelters 
probably would be insufficient to provide minimum 
light for more than a very few days. 

A low-amperage light bulb used with a large dry 
cell battery or a car battery is an excellent source of 
low-level continuous light. One of the small 12-volt 
bulbs in the instrument panels of cars with 12-volt 
batteries will give enough light for 10 to 15 nights, 

.1. Night scene in a trench shelter 

without light. 

without discharging a car battery so much that it 
cannot be used to start a car. 

Making an efficient battery-powered lighting 
system for your shelter is work best done before a 
crisis arises. During a crisis you should give higher 
priority to many other needs. 

Things to remember about using sma'l bulbs 

with big batteries: 

® Always use a bulb of the same voltage as the 
battery. 

3 Use a small, high-resistance wire, such as bell 
wire, with a car battery. 

® Connect the battery after the rest of the 
improvised light circuit has been completed. 

® Use reflective material such as aluminum foil, 
mirrors, or white boards to concentrate a weak light 
where it is needed. 

• If preparations are made before a crisis, small 
12-volt bulbs (0.1 to 0.25 amps) with sockets and wire 
can be bought at a radio parts store. Electric test clips 
for connecting thin wire to a car battery can be 
purchased at an auto parts store. 

CANDLES AND COMMERCIAL LAMPS 

Persons going to a shelter should take all their 
candles with them, along with plenty of matches in a 
waterproof container such as a Mason jar. Fully 
occupied shelters can become so humid that matches 
not kept in moisture-proof containers cannot be 
lighted after a single day. 

Lighted candles and other fires should be placed 
near the shelter opening through which air is leaving 
the shelter, to avoid buildup of slight amounts of 
carbon monoxide and other headache-causing gases. 
If the shelter is completely closed for a time for any 
reason, such as to keep out smoke from a burning 
house nearby, all candles and other fires in the shelter 
should be extinguished. 

SAFE EXPEDIENT LAMPS FOR SHELTERS 

The simple expedient lamps described below are 
the results of Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
experiments which started with oil lamps of the kinds 
used by Eskimos and the ancient Greeks. Our 
objective was to develop safe, dependable, long- 
lasting shelter lights that can be made quickly, using 
only common household materials. Numerous field 
tests have proved that average Americans can build 
good lamps by following the instructions given below 
(Fig. 1L2). 

These expedient lamps have the following 

advantages: 

© They are safe. Even if a burning lamp is knocked 
over onto a dry paper, the flame is so small that it will 
be extinguished if the lamp fuel being burned is a 
cooking oil or fat commonly used in the kitchen, and 
if the lamp wick is not much larger than Vie inch in 
diameter. 

© Since the flame is inside a jar, it is not likely to set 
fire to a careless person's clothing or to be blown out 
by a breeze. 

® With the smallest practical wick and flame, a 
lamp burns only about 1 ounce of edible oil or fat in 
eight hours. 

® Even with a flame smallerthan that of a birthday 
candle, there is enough light for reading. To read 
easily by such a small flame, attach aluminum foil to 
three sides and the bottom of the lamp, and suspend it 
between you and your book, just high enough not to 
block your vision. (During the long, anxious days 
and nights spent waiting for fallout to decay, shelter 
occupants will appreciate having someone read aloud 
to them.) 

® A lamp with aluminum foil attached is an 
excellent trap for mosquitoes and other insects that 
can cause problems in an unscreened shelter. They 
are attracted to the glittering light and fall into the oil. 

Gasoline and kerosene lamps should not be 
taken inside a shelter. They produce gases that can 
cause headaches or even death. If gasoline or 
kerosene lamps are knocked over, as by blast winds 
that would rush into shelters over extensive areas, the 
results would be disastrous. 

• Two of these lamps can be made in less than an 
hour, once the materials have bee'n assembled, so 
there is no reason to wait until a crisis arises to make 
them. Oil exposed to the air deteriorates, so it is best 
not to store lamps filled with oil or to keep oil-soaked 
wicks for months. 

89 

2 
< 
O 

a. 
< 

UJ 
z 

a 
.a 
■3 u 

^&* 

E 

g£o 3= 
"-z> o 
or 31- - 

I- <2»Z S 

a- K so 
< u- 

Lü 
U 

ujy tij 

_Jü. CD 
U_0< 

«o>.E 

zoo 

,= gccS 
KC£ z 

siilii 

tree IxOcn 
= tu to t-^ z 
ui5|0°Ö 

<0°-J 
IQZCE3 
IssiS 

Id 
2 (0 
ÜJ < u. z 

2 

h * ° 
OX * 
ri,,1- UJ 
X 
1- 
30 

2 

zoz 

a: ce 
UJ o 

Ü 
z 
z D u. 
a: 
-1 
< o 
UJ 
Ul 
5 

2 

-JCC o 
a Q O O U. 

sis 
"-OOÜ 
5 z1- -iS 

U.H JO 

ZUJZ <£ 
Ui >UJ < 
en o co ffl 

Chapter 12 
Shelter Sanitation and Preventive Medicine 

AN OUNCE OF PREVENTION 

Should fallout force Americans to stay crowded 
into basements and expedient shelters for days or 
weeks, they should protect themselves against the 
spread of infectious diseases by taking both 
accustomed and unaccustomed preventive measures. 
Thousands of our jungle infantrymen in World 
War II learned to practice many of the health- 
preserving techniques described in this chapter. If 
modern medical facilities were temporarily unavail- 
able, the prevention of diseases would become much 
more important to all of us. 

The following infection-preventing measures are 
simple, practical, and require some self-discipline. 
The author has observed their practice and has used 
them while exploring and soldiering in a number of 
jungle, desert, and mountain regions. I also have used 
these measures while field-testing nuclear war 
survival skills in several states. 

Basic first aid also would be of increased 
importance during a major confrontation or war. 
Good first aid booklets and instructions are available 
in practically all communities, so most first aid 
information will not be repeated here. 

DISPOSAL OF HUMAN WASTES 

To preserve health and morale in a shelter 
without a toilet or special chemicals for treatment of 
excrement and urine, human wastes should be 
removed before they produce much gas. A garbage 
can with a lid or a bucket covered with plastic will not 
hold the pressurized gas produced by rotting 
excrement. The following expedient means of 
disposal are listed in increasing order of effectiveness. 

• Use a 5-gallon paint can, a bucket, or a large 
waterproof wastebasket to collect both urine and 
excrement. Use and keep it near the air-exhaust end 
of the shelter. Keep it tightly covered when not in use; 
a piece of plastic tied over the top keeps out insects 
and reduces odors. When such waste containers are 
full or begin to stink badly while covered, put them 
outside the shelter—still covered to keep out flies. 

For some people, especially the aged, bringing a 
toilet seat from home would be justified. Padding on 
the edge of the bucket also helps those who have to sit 
down. An improvised seat of plywood or board 
serves well. 

If only one container is available and is almost 
filled, periodically dump the wastes outside—unless 
fallout is still being deposited. Before an anticipated 
attack, people who plan to stay in a shelter should dig 
a waste-disposal pit if they do not have sufficient 
waste containers for weeks of shelter occupancy. The 
pit should be located about 3 feet from the shelter in 
the down-wind direction. This usually will be the air 
exhaust end of an earth-covered shelter. The pit 
should be surrounded by a ring of mounded, packed 
earth about 6 inches high, to keep surface water from 
heavy rains from running into it. 

Quickly putting or dumping wastes outside is 
not hazardous once fallout is no longer being 
deposited. For example, assume the shelter is in an 
area of heavy fallout and the dose rate outside is 
400 R/ hr—enough to give a potentially fatal dose in 
about an hour to a person exposed in the open. If a 
person needs to be exposed for only 10 seconds to 
dump a bucket, in this 1/360th of an hour he will 
receive a dose of only about 1 R. Under war condi- 
tions, an additional 1-R dose is of little concern. If the 

Preceding page blank 

91 

92 

shelter design does not permit an occupant to dispose 
of wastes without running outside, he can tie cloth or 
plastic over his shoes before going out, and remove 
these coverings in the entry before going back inside 
the shelter room. This precaution will eliminate the 
chance of tracking "hot" fallout particles into the 
shelter, and the small chance of someone getting a 
tiny beta burn in this way. 

-? Have all occupants only urinate in the bucket, 
and defecate into a piece of plastic. Urine contains 
few harmful organisms and can be safely dumped 
outside. 

Two thicknesses of the thin plastic used to cover 
freshly drycleaned clothes will serve to hold bowel 
movements of several persons. Gather the plastic 
around the excrement to form a bag-like container. 
Tie the plastic closed near its upper edges with a string 
or narrow strip of cloth. Do not tie it so tightly as to 
be gas-tight. Each day's collection should be gently 
tossed outside. As the excrement rots, the gas will 
leak out of the tied end of the plastic covering. Flies 
will be attracted in swarms, but they will not be able 
to get into the plastic to contaminate their feet or to 
lay eggs. And because rotting excrement is so 
attractive to flies, shelter occupants will be bothered 
less by these dangerous pests. 

® Use a hose-vented, 5-gallon can or bucket lined 
with a heavy plastic bag; cover tightly with plastic 
when not in use. .1 shows this type of 
expedient toilet. 

The vent-hose runs through a hole near the top 
of the paint can shown and is taped to seal it to the 
can. Such a hole can be quite easily cut with a chisel or 
a sharpened screwdriver. The hose is long enough to 
extend outside the shelter. Its outer end should be 
secured about 6 inches above ground level, to prevent 
water from running into it during a heavy rain. When 
a toilet-can is tightly covered, foul gases can escape 
through the hose to the outdoors. 

With its opening tied shut, a large plastic trash 
bag containing as much as 30 pounds of wastes can be 
lifted out of a toilet-can and disposed of outside the 
shelter. 

The 6-member Utah family described in preced- 
ing chapters used a home-like expedient toilet during 
their 77-hour shelter stay. .2 pictures the 
toilet seat they took with them, placed on a hose- 
vented container in a. hole in the ground. The toilet 
was at one end of the shelter. A person sitting on this 

...j&^tgmm^m 

.1. A 5-gallon paint can used for a hose- 

vented toilet-can. 

toilet could put his feet in the adjacent "stand-up 
hole" and be more comfortable. 

The blanket shown hanging on the left in 
.2 could be drawn in front of the toilet for 
privacy. Behind the girl's head was the emergency 
crawlway-ventilation trench. When the toilet was 
being used, the shelter-ventilating KAP pumped air 
under the blanket-curtain and out the ventilation 
trench, resulting in very little odor in the rest of the 
shelter. 

Vomiting is certain to cause both morale and 
health problems, especially for unprepared shelter 
occupants fearing this first dramatic symptom of 
radiation sickness. Nervousness, combined with the 
effects of unaccustomed food and water, will cause 
even some healthy persons to vomit. In a crowded 
shelter, the sight and smell of vomit will make others 
throw up. Plastic bags, well distributed throughout a 
shelter, are the best means to catch vomit and keep it 

CLEAN WATER AND FOOD 

Disinfecting water by boiling (preferably for at 
least 10 minutes) or by treating it with chlorine or 
iodine has been described in Chapter 8, Water. 

When water is first stored, it should be dis- 
infected by the addition of 1 scant teaspoon of 
ordinary household bleach for each 10 gallons. 

To avoid contaminating water when removing 
small quantities from a container such as a 
waterproof bag, the simplest way is first to pour some 
into a pot or other medium-sized container, from 
which small amounts can be poured into individual 
cups. Dipping water with a cup runs more risk of 
contamination. The cleanest way to take small 
quantities of water out of a container is to siphon it 
with a flexible tube, as described in Chapter 8, Water. 

Sanitary storage of food in expedient shelters is 
often difficult. Although almost any paper or plastic 
covering will keep fallout particles from food, shelter 
dampness can cause paper containers to break. Ants, 
roaches, and weevils can cut through paper or plastic 
coverings to reach food inside. Placing paper 
containers of food in plastic bags and suspending the 
bags from the ceiling of the shelter entryway gives 
good protection against bugs, and quite good protec- 
tion against moisture for a few weeks. (Do not 
obstruct the air flow through an entryway if heat is a 
problem.) A small amount of insect repellent or 
grease smeared on the suspending string or wire will 
stop all crawlers. Metal and strong plastic containers 
with tight lids protect food best. 

The hygienic preparation and serving of food in 
a shelter, especially in hot weather, require that all 
cooked food be eaten promptly. It is best to eat within 
half-an-hour after cooking. Canned foods should be 
consumed shortly after opening. The cleaning and 
disinfecting of utensils, bowls, etc., should be done 
promptly, to prevent bacteria from multiplying and 
to lessen the chances of ants and other insects being 
attracted into the shelter. Sugar should be mixed with 
cereals in the cooking pot, to avoid spilling. 

In Oak Ridge National Laboratory shelter tests, 
only a few infants and toddlers have been included 
among the occupants. Feeding infants and small 
children over a piece of plastic would be one good 
way to keep the inevitable spillage from complicating 
shelter life. 

To avoid using dishes, most foods can be served 
on squares of plastic. Spoons and such plastic 

.2. The hose-vented expedient toilet used 
by the Utah family for over 3 days. (The unconnected 
telephone was brought along as a joke.) 

off the floor. Buckets, pots, or a newspaper folded 
into a cone also will serve. 

DISPOSAL OF DEAD BODIES 

In large shelters which are occupied for many 
days, someone may die even when no occupants have 
been injured by blast, fire, or radiation. The sight or 
the sickly-sweet stink of a decaying human body is 
greatly disturbing. Some civil defense workers have 
theorized that the best way to take care of a corpse in 
a shelter until the fallout dose-rate outdoors is low 
enough to allow burial is to seal it in a large plastic 
bag. A simple test with a dead dog proved this idea 
impractical: gas pressure caused the bag to burst. One 
solution is to put the corpse outside as soon as the 
odor is evident. First, if possible, place it in a bag 
made of large plastic trash bags taped together and 
perforated with a few pinholes. 

94 

"dishes" can be licked clean after eating, then 
disinfected by boiling or by dipping them into 
chlorine bleach solution containing one tablespoon 
of Clorox-type bleach to a quart of water. 

A shelter occupant without a spoon can eat very 
thick grain mush in a sanitary manner by placing it on 
a piece of plastic held in his hand, forming it into a 
ball, and taking bites. Although Chinese peasants 
often eat wet-rice balls held in their bare hands, 
experiments have indicated—not unexpectedly— 
that Americans do not like to eat this way. 

Cooking without oil or fat makes disinfecting 
utensils much easier when water and fuel are being 
conserved. Cereals and sugar are easy to wash off 
with a little water, without soap. 

Ticks and chiggers are usually found on grass 
and low bushes. To avoid carrying these pests into the 
shelter, do not bring grass or dead leaves into your 
shelter for bedding except in freezing weather. Cut 
leafy branches high above the ground: few pests live 
in tall vegetation. 

PERSONAL POSSESSIONS 

Toothbrushes are not boiled or otherwise dis- 
infected after being used, because we all develop con- 
siderable resistance to our own infective organisms. 
For the same reason, each individual should have his 
own personal drinking cup, bowl, and spoon. They 
should be cleaned as well as possible and kept covered 
when not in use. 

CONTROL OF INSECTS 

PREVENTION OF SKIN DISEASES 

Insect sprays used in high-protection-factor 
shelters are likely to cause more problems than they 
eliminate. Poisonous insecticides should be used with 
caution. Insect repellents on the skin and clothing are 
generally helpful, but not likely to be in sufficient 
supply to last for weeks or months. Some insect 
problems and simple means of controlling them are 
described below. 

Mosquitoes would multiply rapidly after an 
attack, because normal control measures would not 
be in effect. Using insect screen or mosquito netting 
to cover the ventilation openings of a shelter is the 
best way to keep out mosquitoes, flies, and all larger 
insects. However, if the shelter has no air pump, it is 
impractical to use screens that obstruct the free 
movement of vital air—except in cold weather. 

The fly population would explode after a nuclear 
attack. Radiation doses several times larger than 
doses that would kill people do not sterilize insects. In 
extensive rural areas where almost all people could 
have adequate shelter to be safe from fallout, most 
domestic animals and wild creatures would be killed. 
Trillions of flies would breed in the dead bodies. 

Shelter occupants should make every effoit to 
prevent flies from reaching disease-spreading human 
wastes. 

Ants, especially in the warmer parts of the 
country, could drive people out of expedient shelters. 
The best prevention is to try to find a shelter-building 
site that is not near an ant nest. If shelter occupants 
are careful in storing food and eating, ants are less 
likely to become a problem. 

In crowded shelters, especially during hot 
weather, skin diseases are likely to be a more serious 
problem than is generally recognized. The impor- 
tance of learning how to prevent skin diseases was 
made apparent by one of the very few shelter- 
occupancy tests to be conducted in the summer 
without air conditioning. This was a Navy test in 
which 99 men lived for 12 days in an underground 
shelter cooled only with outdoor summer air.15 The 
incidence of skin complaints was high, even though 
medical treatment was available on a daily basis. The 
total number of reports to sick call was 560; 34 of 
these 99 healthy young men contracted heat rash and 
23 had other skin complaints such as fungus 
infections. However, these sailors lived in an 
inadequately ventilated shelter and did not cleanse 
their sweaty skins or use the other methods listed 
below for preventing skin troubles. 

Even in shelters that are skillfully ventilated with 
adequate outdoor air, skin diseases will be a serious 
problem—especially in hot weather—unless special 
hygiene measures are followed. Humid heat and heat 
rash increase susceptibility to skin diseases. Most of 
the following measures for preventing skin diseases 
have been practiced by jungle natives for thousands 
of years. 

® Wash off sweat and dead skin. (When it is hot 
and humid, dead skin is continuously rubbing and 
flaking off and starting to decay.) Many jungle 
natives rinse their bodies several times a day. Bathing 
several times a day with soap is harmful in humid 
heat; the rapid loss of normal skin oils is one of the 
causes of skin diseases. Your skin can be kept fairly 

OS 

clean by rinsing off each day with just a cup of water, 
while rubbing gently with a very small cloth. A 6-inch 
square of bedsheet cloth serves well. So that you can 
dispose of the dirty water afterwards, wash yourself 
while standing on a piece of plastic with its edges held 
up slightly. (Place sticks or narrow boards under the 
edges.) Use about two-thirds of the precious water for 
the first rinse, starting from the face down and gently 
rubbing neck, armpits, stomach, groin, buttocks, and 
feet with a washcloth. Then use the remaining water 
to rinse off again, using bare fingers. If boiling water 
is available, sterilize washcloths every day by boiling 
them for a few minutes. 

• Sleep as" cool and bare as practical, to dry the 
maximum skin area. 

• If practical, sit and sleep only where other 
members of your family do and avoid use of bedding 
by more than one family. 

• Avoid infection from toilet seats by disinfecting 
with a strong chlorine solution and then rinsing, by 
covering with paper, or by not sitting down. 

e Wash or disinfect clothing as often as practical, 
especially underwear and socks. Disinfecting cloth- 
ing, not laundering it, is the most important health 
objective under difficult shelter conditions. Dipping 
clothing into boiling water disinfects it. Unless plenty 
of water is available for rinsing, do not disinfect 
clothing by putting it in a chlorine bleach solution. 

• Wear shoes or sandals when walking about, to 
prevent fungus infections of the feet. 

RESPIRATORY DISEASES 

The spread of respiratory and other diseases 
transmitted by coughing and sneezing would be 
difficult to control in long-occupied shelters. 
Adequate ventilation would help in disease preven- 
tion. In small shelters, it would be better if persons 
who are sneezing or coughing could stay near the 
opening being used for air exhaust. In large shelters 
with many occupants, the risk of one or more of them 
having a disease that is easily spread obviously will be 
higher than in a small shelter. 

• Chapter 13 
Surviving Without Doctors 

A TEMPORARY RETURN TO SELF-HELP 

Most doctors, hospital facilities, and medical 
supplies are located in cities. An all-out attack would 
destroy most of these modern blessings. Even if 
medical assistance were nearby, only a few of the 
survivors confined to shelters in areas of heavy fallout 
would be able to get needed medicines or the help of a 
doctor. For periods ranging from days to months, 
most unprepared survivors would be forced to live 
under medical conditions almost as primitive as those 
experienced by the majority of mankind for all but 
the past few decades of human history. 

BENIGN NEGLECT 

Life without modern medical help would be less 
painful and hazardous for those survivors who have 
some practical knowledge of what should be 
done—or not done—under primitive, unsanitary 
conditions. Information about first aid and hygienic 
precautions can be obtained from widely available 
Red Cross and civ:! defense booklets and courses. 
This knowledge, with a stock of basic first aid 
supplies, would reduce suffering and prevent many 
dangerous illnesses. However, first aid instructions 
do not include advice about what to do for serious 
injuries and sicknesses if no doctors or effective 
medicines are available. 

Where There Is No Doctor?1 the excellent self- 
help handbook recommended by Volunteers in 
Technical Assistance, gives much information that 
goes far beyond the scope of first aid. But even this 
handbook repeatedly recommends getting profes- 
sional medical help whenever possible for serious 
injuries and illnesses. 

Fortunately, the human body has remarkable 
capabilities for healing itself, especially if the injured 

or sick person and his companions practice intelligent 
"benign neglect." Such purposeful non-interference 
with the body's recuperative processes was called 
"masterful inactivity" by Colonel C. Blanchard 
Henry, M.D., a widely recognized authority on mass 
casualty evacuation and treatment. Colonel Henry 
was one of the first medical officers to visit Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki after their destruction and was an 
experienced analyzer of civil defense preparations in 
several countries. 

The following is a brief summary of 
Colonel Henry's medical advice for nuclear war 
survivors living under primitive conditions and 
unable to get the help of a doctor or effective 
medicines." (Additional advice, enclosed in brackets, 
is from a medical publication/4) 

• Wounds: Apply only pressure dressings to stop 
bleeding—unless an artery has been cut, as by a blast- 
hurled piece of glass. If blood is spurting from a 
wound, apply both a pressure dressing and a 
windlass-type tourniquet. Release the tourniquet 
pressure about every 15 minutes, to allow enough 
blood to reach the flesh beyond the tourniquet and 
keep it alive. There is a fair chance that clotting under 
the pressure dressing will stop blood loss before it 
becomes fatal. 

• Infected wounds: Do not change dressings 
frequently. The formation of white pus shows that 
white corpuscles are mobilizing to combat the 
infection. In World War I, wounded soldiers in 
hospitals suffered agonies having their wounds 
cleaned and dressed frequently; many died as a result 
of such harmful care. In contrast, before antibiotics 
became available late in World War II, casts and 
dressings on infected wounds sometimes were not 
changed for weeks. (The author saw this treatment in 
China and India and smelled the stench resulting 

Preceding page lank 

97 

from such "benign neglect" of American soldiers' 
wounds—neglect that helped save limbs and lives.) 

® Pieces of glass deeply embedded in flesh: Do not 
probe with tweezers or a knife in an attempt to extract 
them. Most glass will come out when the wounds 
discharge pus. 

® Burns: Do not apply grease, oil or any other 
medicine to the burned area. Cover the area securely 
with a clean, dry dressing or folded cloth. Do not 
change the dressing frequently. [For most bums, the 
bandage need not be removed until the tenth to 
fourteenth day. Give plenty of slightly salted water: 
about 1 teaspoon (4.5 gm) of salt per quart (or liter)., 
preferably chilled, in amounts of l to 3 liters 
daily.34] 

® Broken bones: Apply simple splints to keep the 
bones from moving. Do not worry about deformities; 
most can be corrected later by a doctor. Do not 
attempt traction setting of broken bones. 

• Shock: Keep the victim warm. Place blankets or 
other insulation material under him. Do not cover 
him with so many blankets that he sweats and suffers 
harmful fluid losses. Give him plenty of slightly salted 
water [about a teaspoon of salt in a liter (or quart) 
of water], 

• Heat prostration: Give adequate fluids, includ- 
ing slightly salty water. 

• Simple childbirth: Keep hands off. Wait until the 
mother has given birth. Do not tie and cut the cord 
unless a potent disinfectant is available. Instead, use 
the primitive practice of wrapping the cord and the 
placenta around the infant until they dry. Avoid the 
risk of infecting the mother by removing the rest of 
the afterbirth; urge the mother to work to expel it. 

• Toothache: Do not attempt to pull an aching 
tooth. Decaying teeth will abscess and fall out. This is 
a painful but seldom fatal process—one which -was 
endured by most of our remote ancestors who 
reached maturity. 

VETERINARIAN ANTIBIOTICS 

People who for decades have used antibiotics to 
combat their infections have not produced normal 
quantities of antibodies, and have subnormal 
resistance to many infections. People who have not 
been dependent on antibiotics have these antibodies. 
In the aftermath of a massive nuclear attack, most 
surviving Americans would be in rural areas; many 

would need antibiotics. A large part of their need 
could be met by the supplies of veterinarian 
antibiotics kept on livestock and chicken farms, at 
feed mills, and in small towns. Many animals are 
given more antibiotics in their short lives than most 
Americans receive in theirs. Hogs, for example, are 
given antibiotics and/or other disease-controlling 
medicines in their feed each day. In many farming 
areas, veterinary antibiotics and other medicines are 
in larger supply than are those for people. Realistic 
preparations to survive an all-out attack should 
include utilizing these supplies. 

RADIATION SICKNESS 

For the vast majority of Americans who would 
receive radiation doses from a massive attack, the 
help of doctors, antibiotics, blood transfusions, etc., 
would not be of life-or-death importance. Very few of 
those receiving acute doses (received within 24 hours) 
of less than 100 R would become sick, even briefly. 
All of those exposed to acute doses between 100 R 
and 200 R should recover.6 If total doses this size or 
even several times larger are received over a period of 
a few months in small doses of around 6 R per day, no 
incapacitating symptoms should result. The human 
body usually can repair almost all radiation damage 
if the daily doses are not too large. 

The majority of those with acute doses of less 
than about 350 R will recover without medical 
treatment. Almost all of those receiving acute doses 
of over 600 R would die within a few weeks, even if 
they were to receive the complex hospital treatments 
given to the very rare peacetime victims of large 
radiation doses. If all doctors and the equipment and 
drugs needed for such heroic treatments magically 
were to survive an attack—and persons suffering 
from radiation sickness could reach them—relatively 
few additional lives could be saved. 

The most effective way to reduce losses of health 
and life from radiation sickness is to prevent 
excessive exposure to radiation. Adequate shelter 
and essential life-support items are the best means of 
saving lives in a nuclear war. The following informa- 
tion on radiation sickness is given to help the reader 
understand the importance of building a good shelter 
and to help him distinguish between symptoms of 
common illnesses and first symptoms of radiation 
sickness. 

The first symptoms of radiation sickness are 
nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, and a general 

feeling of illness.' These symptoms begin several 
hours after exposure to acute doses of 100 R to 200 R, 
and within 30 minutes or less after receiving a fatal 
dose. A source of probable confusion is the fact that 
one or more of these symptoms is experienced by 
many people when they are first exposed to great 
danger, as in an air raid shelter during a conventional 
bombardment. 

The occupants of a shelter might worry unneces- 
sarily for weeks, mistaking their early emotional 
reactions for the initial phase of radiation sickness. 
This would be particularly true if they had no 
dependable instrument for measuring radiation, or 
if none of them knew how to use such an 
instrument. 

The initial symptoms end within a day or two. 
Then follows the latent phase of radiation sickness, 
during which the patient experiences few, if any, 
symptoms. If the dose received was in the non-fatal 
range, the latent phase may last as long as 
2 weeks. 

In the final phase, the victim of serious or fatal 
radiation sickness will have reduced resistance to 
infections and is likely to suffer diarrhea, loss of hair, 
and small hemorrhages of the skin, mouth, and/or 
intestinal tract. Diarrhea from common causes may 
be confused with the onset of radiation sickness, but 
hemorrhages and loss of much hair are clear indica- 
tions of having received serious, but not necessarily 
fatal, radiation exposure. The final phase usually 
lasts for one to two months. Any available antibiotics 
should be reserved for this critical phase of 
the illness. 

Doses of 1000 R to 5000 R result in bloody 
diarrhea, fever, and biuod circulation abnormalities, 
with the initial symptoms beginning within less than 
30 minutes after exposure and the final phase 
occurring less than a day thereafter. Death results 
within 2 to 14 days. The victim of a dose of over 
5000 R dies a hard death within 48 hours, due to 
radiation damage to the central nervous system. 

Recovery from most cases of radiation sickness 
will be more likely for patients who receive a well 
balanced diet, rest, freedom from stress, and clean 
surroundings. But most patients, even without these 
advantages, will survive—as proved by the survival of 
thousands of Hiroshima and Nagasaki citizens who 
suffered serious radiation sickness. Nursing radiation 
victims is not hazardous. Even persons dying from a 
dose of 5000 R are not sources of dangerous radiation 

99 

by wartime standards, and radiation sickness is 
not contagious. 

LIFETIME RISKS FROM RADIATION 

The large radiation doses that many survivors of 
a nuclear attack would receive would result in serious 
long-term risks of death from cancer. But neither the 
lifetime risks from large wartime nor small peacetime 
radiation doses are as bad as many people believe. 
The risk estimates of reputable scientists vary widely. 
Joseph Califano, Secretary of the U.S. Department 
of Health, Education, and Welfare, gave testimony 
on April 4, 1979 that reflects an average of the 
reputable estimates. During an investigation of the 
Three Mile Island nuclear accident, Mr. Califano 
stated a "reasonable guess": if 10,000 people (a typi- 
cal mixture of sexes and ages) are exposed to 
1000 millirem (1 rem) of radiation, one additional 
fatal cancer will result.15 (The "rem" is an abbrevia- 
tion for "roentgen equivalent (in) man."6 The rem 
takes into account the biological effects of different 
kinds of radiation. For external gamma-ray radiation 
from fallout, the numerical value of an exposure or 
dose given in roentgens is approximately the same as 
the numerical value given in rems or in rads, another 
unit in which radiation doses are given. Therefore, for 
simplicity's sake, this book gives both instrument 
readings (exposures) and doses in roentgens (R).) 

This risk estimate can be applied to large 
wartime radiation doses from fallout: If 100 people 
each received a dose of 100 R (or 100 rem, or 100 
rads), over a lifetime period it is probable that there 
would be one more death resulting from cancer than 
if these same people had not received this radia- 
tion dose. 

The reader desiring good information on the 
long-term and worldwide effects of radiation is 
referred to two authoritative reports of the National 
Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C. 20006: The 
Effects on Populations of Exposures to Low Levels 
of Ionizing Radiation (The BEI R Report made by the 
NAS Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing 
Radiation) (November 1972); and Long-Term 
Worldwide Effects of Multiple Nuclear-Weapons 
Detonations (1975). 

From the standpoint of basic survival know- 
how, these and other complicated scientific studies 
show that after a nuclear attack people should: 

* Provide the best protection against radiation 
for pregnant women and young children, since 

100 

fetuses and the very young are the most likely to be 
hurt by radiation. 

* Persuade older people to do more of the 
essential work that necessitates receiving large 
radiation doses. A 65-year-old is less susceptible to 
radiation than a 20-year-old, and the older person 
probably will not live long enough to die of a cancer 
that takes 20 years or more to develop 

PREVENTION OF THYROID DAMAGE 
FROM RADIOACTIVE IODINES 

There is no medicine that will effectively prevent 
nuclear radiations from damaging the human body 
cells that they strike. However, a salt of the elements 
potassium and iodine, taken orally even in very small 
quantities '/: hour to 1 day before radioactive iodines 
are swallowed or inhaled, prevents about 99% of the 
damage to the thyroid gland that otherwise would 
result. The thyroid gland readily absorbs both non- 
radioactive and radioactive iodine, and normally it 
retains much of this element in either or both forms. 
When ordinary, non-radioactive iodine is made 
available in the blood for absorption by the thyroid 
gland before any radioactive iodine is made available, 
the gland will absorb and retain so much that it 
becomes saturated with non-radioactive iodine. 
When saturated, the thyroid can absorb only about 
1% as much additional iodine, including radioactive 
forms that later may become available in the blood; 
then it is said to be blocked. (Excess iodine in the 
blood is rapidly eliminated by the action of 
the kidneys.) 

An excess of ordinary iodine retained in the 
thyroid gland is harmless, but quite small amounts of 
radioactive iodine retained in the thyroid eventually 
will give such a large radiation dose to thyroid cells 
that abnormalities are likely to result. These would 
include loss of thyroid function, nodules in the 
thyroid, or thyroid cancer. Sixty-four Marshall 
Islanders on Rongelap Atoll were accidentally 
exposed to radioactive fallout produced by a large 
H-bomb test explosion on Bikini Atoll, about 
100 miles away. Twenty-two of them developed 
thyroid abnormalities beginning nine years later.6 In 
the two days before they were taken out of the fallout 
area, these completely uninformed natives, living 
essentially outdoors, had received estimated whole- 
body gamma-ray doses of about 175 R from the 
fallout all around them. They absorbed most of the 
radioactive iodine retained by their thyroid glands as 
a result of eating and drinking fallout-contaminated 

food and water during their two days of exposure. 
(Because of unusual environmental conditions at the 
time of fallout deposition, some of the retained 
radioactive iodine may have come from the air 
they breathed.) 

An extremely small and inexpensive daily dose 
of the preferred non-radioactive potassium salt, 
potassium iodide (Kl), if taken '/:hourto 1 day before 
exposure to radioactive iodine, will reduce later 
absorption of radioactive iodine by the thyroid to 
only about 1% of what the absorption would be 
without this preventive measure. Extensive experi- 
mentation and study have led to the Federal Drug 
Administration's approval of 130-milligram (130- 
mg) tablets for this preventive (prophylactic) use 
only."'*'17 A 130-mg dose provides the same daily 
amount of iodine as does each tablet that English 
authorities for years have placed in the hands of the 
police near nuclear power plants, for distribution to 
the surrounding population in the very unlikely event 
of a major nuclear accident. It is quite likely that a 
similar-sized dose is in the Russian "individual, 
standard first-aid packet." According to a compre- 
hensive Soviet 1969 civil defense handbook." this 
first-aid packet contains "anti-radiation tablets 
and anti-vomiting tablets (potassium iodide and 
etaperain)." 

© Prophylactic use of potassium iodide 
in peacetime nuclear accidents. 

In March 1979 no 130-mg potassium iodide 
tablets were available in the U nited States. Therefore, 
when the 1979 accident that killed no one occurred at 
the Three Mile Island nuclear plant in Pennsylvania, 
259,000 small bottles of a saturated aqueous solution 
of potassium iodide were produced and rushed to the 
vicinity of the accident. An equal number of medicine 
droppers also was supplied." It was not necessary to 
distribute this prophylactic medicine, however, 
because the plant's containment system prevented the 
discharge of hazardous quantities of radioactive 
iodine. 

The following information and warnings con- 
cerning the use of potassium iodide were prepared by 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. This 
official advice would have been distributed along 
with small bottles of potassium iodide solution if the 
1979 accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant 
had resulted in dangerous discharges of radioactive 
iodine. 

PATIENT INFORMATION USE OF SATURATED 
SOLUTION OF POTASSIUM IODIDE (SSKI) 
FOR THYROID BLOCKING 

Directions for Use: See label on bottle 

Background: This product is available solely for public 
health protection in the event of a nuclear accident which 
releases into the environment radioactive iodine which may 
be inhaled or swallowed. Use of potassium iodide as 
directed reduces the accumulation of radioactive iodine in 
the thyroid gland. This is important because radiation may 
damage the cells of the thyroid gland in such a way that 
changes in the function or structure of the gland may occur 
even many years after exposure. You should take this 
product as soon as possible after being told to do so by your 
public health authority. While the length of time you will 
take this product will depend upon the directions from your 
public health authority, it is not expected to exceed about 
10 days unless specifically directed otherwise. 

Facts about Potassium Iodide: Potassium iodide has 
been used for many years in large doses (2 to 10 times the 
dose recommended here) to treat persons with asthma and 
other lung conditions. It is a relatively safe drug when taken 
as directed, but as with any drug, side effects may occur. 
Although side effects are unlikely because of the low dose 
and the short time you will be taking the drug, they are 
listed in this insert along with advice on what to do if they 
occur. It isimportant to emphasize that largerdoses are not 
necessary for the drug to work properly. The larger the 
dose, the greater the risk of side effects; therefore, do not 
exceed the recommended dose. 

Who Can Take Potassium Iodide''. Unless you are 
allergic to iodide, you may take potassium iodide as 
directed. Even if you are taking a thyroid hormone drug 
product for an underactive thyroid gland, or taking an anti- 
thyroid drug for an overactive thyroid gland, you may still 
take potassium' iodide. Pregnant women may also 
take it. ! 

Side Effects: In general, the side effects of potassium 
iodide have been seen when higher doses of potassium 
iodide have been taken for a long time. You should be 
especially cautious not to exceed the recommended dose or 
take potassium iodide longer than instructed. There are two 
kinds of side effects: those not involving the thyroid gland 
and those involving the thyroid gland. 

Side effects not involving the thyroid gland. The 
taking of iodide has been associated with skin rashes, 
swelling of the salivary glands ("iodide mumps"), and 
iodism (metallic taste, burning in the mouth and throat, 
soreness of the teeth and gums, skin rashes, symptoms of a 
head cold, and sometimes a gastric upset and diarrhea). 
Also, allergic reactions may produce symptoms such as 
fever and pains in the joints or, on rare occasions, swelling 
of various parts of the face and body with at times severe 
shortness of breath requiring immediate medical attention. 

Side effects involving the thyroid gland: The taking of 
iodide has been associated with overactivity of the thyroid 
gland, underactivity of the thyroid gland, and enlargement 
of the thyroid gland (goiter). Goiter may occur also in 
infants born to mothers who took large doses of potassium 
iodide throughout pregnancy. 

What To Do If Side Effects Occur: 

For side effects not involving the thyroid gland: If any 
of these side effects occur, call your physician or public 
health authority for instructions. If the symptoms are 
minor, you may be advised to continue taking potassium 
iodide. If you have an allergic reaction, discontinue taking 
potassium iodide and seek immediate medical attention. 

For side effects involving the thyroid gland: Because 
these side effects are very unlikely, with short term use, they 
pose no immediate problem. However, the taking of iodide 
has been associated with overactivity of the thyroid gland in 
elderly persons with heart disease. The symptoms of an 
overactive thyroid gland are very similar to those as- 
sociated with anxiety and include nervousness, sweating, 
and rapid heartbeat. Because in an emergency some anxiety 
is likely, it is difficult to determine whether these symptoms 
are caused by anxiety or an overactive thyroid gland. An 
overactive thyroid, however, would only occur after you 
had taken potassium iodide for several days. Thus, if these 
symptoms are persistent and severe, and particularly if the 
heartbeat is not only rapid but irregular, you should call 
your physician or public health authority because medical 
attention is probably required. 

If you do not have any potassium iodide, do not 
try to use tincture of iodine as a blocking agent. 
Elemental (free) iodine is ineffective as a blocking 
agent and is poisonous if taken in much larger 
quantities than the very small amounts consumed 
when you drink water that has been disinfected with 
iodine. Also you should not make a futile, harmful 
attempt to eat enough iodized salt to result in thyroid 
blocking. 

® For protection against radioactive iodine 
in fallout from a nuclear war fought outside 
the United States. 

Most strategists believe that a nuclear war 
fought by nations other than the United States is a 
more likely catastrophe than a nuclear attack on 
America. Several of the Soviet and Chinese nuclear 
test explosions have resulted in very light fallout 
deposition and some contamination of milk by 
radioactive iodine in many of the 50 states. However, 
serious contamination of milk, fruits, and vegetables 
could result if war fallout from many nuclear 

102 

explosions were to be carried across the Pacific by the 
prevailing westerly winds. The measured contamina- 
tion of milk from a few cows in the United States 
indicates that protective measures would be taken. 
The worst-contaminated milk produced in Tennessee 
and tested at Oak Ridge National Laboratory was 
from a cow that had grazed on a pasture near the 
laboratory onto which fallout from the Chinese 
test explosion of December 28, 1966 had been 
deposited.40 Deposition of this fallout began in 
Tennessee on January !, 1967. This cow's milk 
contained more radioactive iodine than is specified 
by the Food and Drug Administration's very con- 
servative "Response level for Emergency PAG" 
(Protective Action Guide) as warranting protective 
action.37 "An Emergency PAG establishes a level at 
which responsible officials should isolate food 
containing radioactivity to prevent its introduction 
into commerce, ..."'" 

If a nuclear war were to be fought in northern 
parts of Asia, or in Europe, or in the Middle East, a 
very small fraction of the fallout would come to earth 
on parts or all of the United States.40 This fallout 
would not result in an overwhelming catastrophe to 
Americans, although the long-term health hazards 
would be serious by peacetime standards and the 
economic losses would be great.40 The dangers from 
radioactive iodine in milk produced by cows that ate 
fallout-contaminated feeds or drank fallout-contam- 
inated water would be minimized if Americans did 
not consume dairy products for several weeks after 
the arrival of war fallout. Safe milk and other baby 
foods would be the only essential foods that soon 
would be in very short supply. The parents of babies 
and young children who had stored potassium iodide 
would be especially thankful they had made this very- 
inexpensive preparation, that can give 99%-effective 
protection to the thyroid. All members of families 
with a supply of potassium iodide could safely eat a 
normal diet long before those without, it could 
do so. 

The most dangerous type of radioactive iodine 
decays rapidly. At the end of each 8-day period it 
gives off only half as much radiation as at the start of 
that period. So at the end of 80 days it emits only 
about 1/1000 as much radiation per hour as at the 
beginning of these 80 days. Because of this rapid 
decay, a 100-day supply of potassium iodide should 
be sufficient if a nuclear war. either overseas or within, 
the United States, were to last no more than a week or 
two. 

The probability of most Americans being 
supplied with prophylactic potassium iodide during a 
major nuclear disaster appears low. Under present 
regulations the decision concerning whether to 
stockpile and dispense potassium iodide tablets rests 
solely with each state's governor.41 

® Use for thyroid protection after a nuclear 
attack on the United States. 

After a nuclear attack, very few of the survivors 
would be able to obtain potassium iodide or to get 
advice about when to start taking it or stop taking it. 
In areas of heavy fallout, some survivors without 
potassium iodide would receive radiation doses large 
enough to destroy thyroid function before modern 
medical treatments would again become available. 
Even those injuries to the thyroid that result in its 
complete failure to function cause few deaths in 
normal times, but under post-attack conditions 
thyroid damage would be much more hazardous. 

• Ways to obtain potassium iodide 
for prophylactic use. 

* By prescription today. With a prescription 
from a doctor, a U.S.P. saturated solution of 
potassium iodide can be bought at most pharmacies 
today. (In a crisis, the present local supplies would be 
entirely inadequate.) The saturated solution contains 
a very small amount of a compound that prevents it 
from deteriorating significantly for a few years. It is 
best stored in a dark glass bottle with a solid, non- 
metallic cap that screws on liquid-tight. A separate 
medicine dropper should be kept in the same place. 
An authoritative publication36 of the National 
Committee on Radiation Protection and Measure- 
ments states: "Supplies of potassium iodide can be 
stored in a variety of places, including homes, ..." 

In April of 1979, a 2-ounce bottle, containing 
about 2,000 drops of this 99-percent-effective 
prophylactic solution, sold for $2.35 in an economy- 
drug store. This is enough for 500 daily doses—at a 
cost of less than half a cent per dose. 

* Possibly without prescription in future years. 
If 130-mg potassium iodide tablets are produced in 
the United States and if they are made available in 
pharmacies, they will be sold over-the-counter and 
the buyer will receive accompanying written instruc- 
tions for their prophylactic use." 

103 

* From chemical supply firms. Chemical 
reagent grade potassium iodide is purer than the 
pharmaceutical grade. Individuals can buy it from 
some chemical supply firms; no prescription or other 
authorization is necessary. In 1979, one pound of the 
chemical reagent grade—enough for approximately 
3.500 doses of 130 mgeach—retailed for around S20. 
(Years ago the author bought a pound, enough for 
family and friends.) 

For years of storage, crystalline or granular 
potassium iodide is better than a saturated solution. 
These dry forms are sold by prescription in some 
pharmacies. Dry potassium iodide should be stored 
in a dark bottle with a gasketed, non-metallic cap that 
screws on tightly. Two-fluid-ounce bottles, filled with 
dry potassium iodide as described below, are good 
sizes for a family. Separate medicine droppers should 
be kept with stored bottles. 

• Practical expedient ways to prepare and 
take daily prophylactic doses of a saturated 
solution of potassium iodide. 

To prepare a saturated solution of potassium 
iodide, fill a bottle about 60% full of crystalline or 
granular potassium iodide. (A 2-fluid-ounce bottle, 
made of dark glass and having a solid, non-metallic, 
screwcap top, is a good size for a family. About 
2 ounces of crystalline or granular potassium iodide is 
needed to fill a 2-fluid-ounce bottle about 60% full.) 
Next, pour safe, room-temperature water into the 
bottle until it is about 90% full. Then close the bottle 
tightly and shake it vigorously for at least 2 minutes. 
Some of the solid potassium iodide should remain 
permanently undissolved at the bottom of the bottle; 
this is proof that the solution is saturated. 

Experiments with a variety of ordinary house- 
hold medicine droppers determined that 1 drop of a 
saturated solution of potassium iodide contains from 
28 to 36 mg of potassium iodide. The recommended 
expedient daily doses of a saturated solution 
(approximately 130 mg for adults and children, and 
65 mg for infants) are as follows: 

* For adults and children, 4 drops per day of a 

saturated solution of potassium iodide. 

* For infants less than 12 months old, 2 drops 
per day of a saturated solution of potassium 
iodide. 

Potassium iodide has a very bad taste, so bad 
that a single crystal or 1 d rop of the saturated solution 
in a small child's mouth would make him cry. Since 
many persons will not take a bad-tasting medication, 
especially if no short-term health hazards are likely to 
result from not taking it, the following two methods 
of taking a saturated solution are recommended: 

* Put 4 drops of the solution into a glass of milk 
or other beverage, stir, and drink quickly. Then drink 
some of the beverage with nothing added. If only 
water is available, use it in the same manner. 

* If bread is available, place 4 drops of the 
solution on a small piece of it; dampen and mold it 
into a firm ball the size of a large pea, about /s inch in 
diameter.There is almost no taste if this "pill" is 
swallowed quickly with water. (If the pill is coated 
with margarine, there is no taste.) 

As stated before, 4 drops of the saturated 
solution provide a dose approximately equal to 
130 mg of potassium iodide. 

Chapter 14 

Expedient Shelter Furnishings 

IMPORTANCE OF ADEQUATE 
FURNISHINGS 

Throughout history, people have endured being 
crowded together while living and sleeping on hard 
surfaces. In times of war and privation, people have 
lived in such conditions for much longer periods than 
would be necessary for shelter occupancy due to 
fallout.42 Realistic basement-shelter-occupancy tests 
conducted by research contractors for the U.S. Office 
of Civil Defense (now the Defense Civil Preparedness 
Agency) have shown that modern Americans can live 
and sleep for two weeks on a concrete floor. In some 
of these tests, only 8 square feet of floor space was 
provided for each person; only pieces of corrugated 
cardboard 3/i6-inch thick lessened the hardship of 
sleeping and sitting on concrete. 

Nevertheless, shelters should be adequately 

furnished whenever possible, for these reasons: 

• More people can occupy a properly furnished 
shelter—for weeks, if necessary—if adequate addi- 
tional ventilation is supplied for the additional 
occupants. 

O Cleanliness, health, and morale are better if well- 
designed furnishings are used. More serious compli- 
cations than discomfort are likeiy to result if 
occupants have to huddle together on a bare 
floor—especially if the floor is damp earth. 

® Persons occupying a shelter made relatively 
comfortable by its furnishings are more likely to stay 
in the shelter long enough to avoid dangerous 
exposure to fallout radiation. 

CHAIRS, BENCHES, AND BUNKS 

The father of the previously described Utah 
family of six knew that the members of his family 
would be most uncomfortable and probably would 
have sore backs if they spent the required 72 hours of 
continuous shelter occupancy huddled on the floor. 
(Their shelter room was only 3'/z feet wide and I6V2 
feet long.) So this family took with them from home 
four folding chairs and two pieces of plywood (each 
21 inches wide by 6 feet long) tied as part of the load 
on top of the family car. Four small wooden boxes 
served as food containers during the drive to the 
shelter-building site. In the shelter, the boxes were 
used to support the ends of two narrow plywood 
bunks (.1). 

The family's system of sleeping and sitting in 
shifts worked reasonably well. There were discom- 
forts: the adults found the two plywood bunks too 
narrow, and the plywood was so hard that all the 
family members used their sleeping bags for padding 
rather than for needed warmth on chilly nights. The 
father and oldest son, whose turn to sleep was during 
normal waking hours, had trouble sleeping in such a 
small shelter while the lively 4-year-old son was 
awake. 

Note that in the shelter pictured in .1 the 
earth walls are covered with plastic from trash bags. 
Covering earth walls with plastic or bed sheets makes 
for a cleaner shelter, with less earth falling in the faces 
of people who sleep on the floor. Bedsheets on the 
walls make a shelter brighter, but are flammable and 
a potential fire hazard. The plastic film prevented the 

Preceding page Wank 

105 

106 

.1. Bunks and folding chairs furnished 
this Pole-Covered Trench Shelter. (Note the sus- 
pended transistor radio. Reception is good in all 
types of expedient shelters tested to date.) 

.2. Benches with overhead bunks in a 
skillfully designed Small-Pole Shelter of Russian 
design. Three rural families in a wooded area of 
Tennessee built this expedient blast shelter in 48 
hours, including the time spent felling trees and 
making furnishings. 

earth walls from drying and crumbling as a result of 
the hot, dry desert air pumped through the shelter 
during the day 

Benches with overhead wooden bunks are 
shown in .2. These were installed in a Small- 
Pole Shelter 6 feet wide with a ceiling almost 7 feet 
high. 

A well-designed expedient shelter should be as 
small as practical, with all space used very efficiently. 
The builders should make the heights and widths of 
benches and bunks as specified in the detailed shelter 
drawings, such as those for the Small-Pole Shelter 
given in Appendix A.3. 

Serious difficulties can result from failure to use 
specific dimensions that may appear unimportant. 
For example, in -field tests at Fort Bragg, N.C., 48 

airborne infantrymen, working only with hand tools, 
cut pine trees and built two 24-man Small-Pole 
Shelters in less than 24 hours.43 The men did' not 
think it necessary to use the specific dimensions when 
they made the furnishings. As a result, they built the 
benches too high and the overhead bunks too far 
below the ceilings. This error forced the men to sit for 
hours in hunched positions. Even these able-bodied 
young men would have developed very sore backs 
and would have wanted very much to leave their 
shelters if they had been forced to sit in a bent-over 
position for days. 

.2 shows a good example of the 
importance of using dimensions which have been 
thoroughly field-tested when building essential parts 
of a shelter. Note the small air-exhaust opening 
above the girl lying on the overhead bunk at one end 

107 

on the floor. In the Utah family's shelter, the floor 
was made comfortable by covering the damp earth 
with pieces of polyethylene cut from trash bags, then 
placing strips of shag rug over the plastic. 

In shelters with ceilings at least 6 feet high, one 
hammock can be hung above another. In a Small- 
Pole Shelter that is 6 feet wide, a greater number of 
people can sleep or sit comfortably at the same time if 
Bedsheet-Hammocks and Bedsheet-Chairs are used 
rather than benches or a combination of benches and 
overhead bunks. .4 shows how Bedsheet- 
Hammocks can be used like double-deck bunks. 

of the shelter. This opening led to a small, chimney- 
like ;;n--exhaust duct made of boards, v/ith its cross- 
sectioaal area as specified in Russian civil defense 
handbooks for natural ventilation of small expedient 
shelters. With such a small air-exhaust opening— 
only 4 square inches (10 square centimeters) per 
person— a fully occupied shelter of this size would 
soon become dangerously overheated in warm or hot 
weather, even though a good expedient shelter- 
venfilatmg pump (a KAP) were to be used. 

BED 

'.ET-HAMMOCK AND CHAIR 

Oil the last night of the Utah family's shelter stay 
it v/As cie,':.- that the six members would win the cash 
bonus offered them for their 72-hour occupancy 
of the shelter starting immediately after they 
completed building it. Therefore, the author showed 
them that night how to make boat-shaped hammocks 
out of bedsheets. (Any strong cloth of the right size 
can be used.) They were shown how to hang these 
short., yet stable, hammocks securely from poles of 
the shelter roof. With three members sleeping in 
hammocks, two on the plywood bunks, and one on 
the floor, all. six. could sleep at the same time. .3 shows part of this sleeping arrangement. 

.14.3. Girl resting in a boat-shaped ham- 
;;- brother slept on the upper bunk of their 

meet, 
3'/2-ft-wide trench shelter. 

.4. Bedsheet-Hammocks hung one above 
the other across the room of a Russian-type Small- 
Pole Shelter made of lumber. 

In a shelter this size without bunks, hanging four 
short hammocks at slight angles to the length of the 
trench would permit four occupants to sleep 
comfortably. An additional two persons could sleep 

Detailed instructions for making a Bedsheet- 
Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair are given at the end 
of this chapter. 

108 

In an evacuation during a real crisis, carrying 
comfortable folding chairs and the materials to make 
wooden bunks would not be advisable. If the family 
car were loaded instead with an equivalent weight of 
additional food and clothing, the members'prospects 
of surviving would be improved. But in an actual 
crisis evacuation, a family planning to occupy a 
shelter with a strong roof should take along a 
bedsheet for each member. The ether lightweight 
items described in the instructions for making a 
Bedsheet-Hammock and a Bedsheet-Chair also 
should be carried. By following the instructions at the 
end of this chapter, a comfortable hammock can be 
made and quickly converted to a comfortable 
suspended chair when not needed for sleeping. 

Hammocks hung high off the floor and above 
other sleepers must be strong, securely suspended, 
and cupped so that it is impossible to fall out 
accidentally. This is why the instructions emphasize 
using a double thickness of bedsheet and folding the 
cloth so as to make the hammock boat-like, with high 
sides. 

In a cold shelter, keeping warm in a hammock is 
somewhat difficult. Easily compressible materials, 
such as those used in a sleeping bag, are squeezed so 
thin under a person's body that they lose most of their 
insulating value. Pads of newspapers about an inch 
thick, protected by cloth coverings, will reduce heat 
losses. The best insulation is a quilt, fastened to the 
underside of a hammock by attaching it with rows of 
stitches every few inches and at right angles to each 
other. 

.5 shows a Bedsheet-Hammock that 
had been quickly converted into a Bedsheet-Chair 
and hung near a shelter wall. It occupies less than half 
the floor space used by the two hammocks shown in 
the preceding illustration. If a reclining seat is 
desired, the two support-points on the ceiling to 
which the chair-arm cords are attached can be 
located farther out from the wall. 

Enough padding material should be placed in 
the bowl-shaped seat of a Bedsheet-Chair to make it 
rather flat. Extra clothing or a folded blanket can be 
used. The three cords suspending the chair should be 
adjusted for length so that the sitter's feet can rest on 
the floor and the edge of the chair seat does not press 
on the undersides of his thighs. (Such pressure cuts 
off circulation. During the London Blitz of World 
War 11, many of the people who sat night after night 
in shelters on folding chairs with canvas seats 

.5. A Bedsheet-Hammock converted 

into a comfortable suspended Bedsheet-Chair. 

developed serious leg conditions. Authorities later 
prohibited bringing such chairs into shelters.) 

CAUTION: To prevent skin infections and 
other diseases from spreading, a person's 
hammock or chair should not be used by others. 
This precaution is particularly important if the 
shelter is hot and its occupants are sweaty. 

HOW TO MAKE A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK 
AND CONVERT IT TO A SUSPENDED 
BEDSHEET-CHAIR 

1. PURPOSE: To enable more people to occupy a 
shelter more comfortably. ■. .. 

2. ADVANTAGES: 

*■ The hammock can be made in a few minutes, 
once you have the materials and the know- 
how. 

* The only materials required are a strong 
double-bed sheet (or an equally large piece of 

109 

Make each pleat about 2 inches wide; make 
the left corner of each pleat about 1 inch 
lower than the left corner of the preceding 
pleat, when the sheet is being held as 
illustrated. Use your left hand to hold the 
completed pleats in place, while making new 
pleats with your right hand. 

0RNL-DW0 77-17387 

CENTER MARK 

any strong fabric), a few feet of rope (or a 
piece of strong fabric from which expedient 
"rope" can be made quickly), a few large nails, 
and some wire. 

* It is difficult to fall out of the hammock 
because its sides are each made about 8 inches 
shorter than its lengthwise mid-section, so as 
to produce a boat-like shape. 

* It provides room for head and shoulders close 
to either end; thus it is practical to hang this 
hammock between supports that are as close 
together as 6 feet. See .6. 

Before beginning work, someone should read 
aloud all of the instructions for making the 
hammock. This will help to avoid mistakes. 

Wn.-OtK 77-17JM 

-STARTING CORNER 

CENTER MARK 

-STARTING CORNER 

OCNl-QWC 7T-173B9 

•CENT;n MARX 

.6. The author lying in a Bedsheet- 
Hammock. (Note that he is pulling the operating 
cord of a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a 
KAP.) 

MAKING A BEDSHEET-HAMMOCK 

A. How to fold and tie the bedsheet: 

1. Select a strong double-bed sheet (one 
containing polyester is best) and use a ruler or 
tape measure to avoid guessing at measure- 
ments. 

2. Fold the bedsheet lengthwise down its center 
line, so that pairs of corners are together. 

3. With the sheet folded, mark the center of 
each of the two folded ends; then hold one 
end up. 

4. Starting at one corner of one end of the 
folded bedsheet, make accordion-like pleats. 

110 

5. When one-half of the upper end of the sheet 
has been folded into pleats almost to the 
CENTER MARK, adjust the pleats so that 
the CENTER MARK is about 4 inches below 
the STARTING CORNER. 

6. Continue making 2-inch pleats on past the 
CENTER MARK, but make the right corner 
of each pleat about 1 inch higher than the 
right corner of the preceding pleat. When the 
pleat-folding is completed, the STARTING 
CORNER and the other corner should be at 
the same height (4 inches) above the 
CENTER MARK. 

7. Tie the hammock-supporting rope tightly 
around the end of the sheet about 3 inches 
below the edge with the CENTER MARK. 
(If a rope strong enough to support at least 
the weight of two men is not available, make 
an expedient "rope" by tearing a 16-inch- 
wide strip from a sheet or other strong cloth 
and then rolling this strip crosswise to its 
length to make a tight roll several feet long. 
Then tie string or small strips of cloth about 1 
inch wide around it, spaced 4 to 6 inches 
apart, to keep the rolled-up cloth from 
unrolling.) 

8. Bend the pleat-folded end of the sheet 
downward around the hammock rope, so 
that the knot of the hammock rope is 
uppermost. 

9. To keep the sheet from being pulled through 
the encircling hammock rope, bind the 
doubled-over end of the sheet with cord (or 
with narrow strips of cloth) about 1 inch 
below the rope. Tie the binding cord at least 
four times around, knotting it each time 
around. 

10. Repeat the procedure (4 through 9) with the 
other end of the double-folded sheet, thus 
producing a boat-shaped hammock with its 
two sides each about 8 inches shorter than its 
lengthwise center section. 

CENTER MARK 

TIE ROPE TIGHTLY 
AROUND FOLDED 
SHEET HERE, 3 
INCHES BELOW THE 
EDGE WITH THE 
CENTER MARK 

WNL-DWC 77-17391 

KNOT OF HAMMOCK 
ROPE 

am.-mc 77-17JM 

KNOTTED BINDING 
CORD 

ORNl-DWG 77-17394 

-WOOD 

NAILS IN WOOD 

LOOP OF COAT 
HANGER WIRE OR 
FENCE WIRE 

HAMMOCK ROPE 

ORNL-DWG 78-6321 

B. How to hang the hammock: 

1. To suspend a hammock from a strong 
wooden roof such as the poles of a Pole- 
Covered Trench Shelter, drive two strong 
nails (at least 3% inches long) into the wood 
at approximately 45° angles, crossing and 
touching each other. Bind the two nails 
together with wire. To prevent a hammock 
rope from being rubbed directly against fixed 
metal, make a loose loop of strong wire (best 
if doubled) through the crossed nails; tie the 
hammock rope to this free-moving wire loop. 

2. To suspend the hammock from a wooden 
wall, use the same type of crossed-nails 
supports, with the nails driven in one above 
the other. 

3. For comfort and safety, hang the hammock 
with the head end 18 inches higher than the 
center and with the foot end 24 inches higher 
than the center. 

4. To make sure that the hammock is strong 
enough, two persons should place their open 
hands on its centerline and put all of their 
weight on the hammock. 

5. To suspend hammocks and hammock-chairs 
from a pole roof that is not being built under 
fear of immediate attack, use loops of strong 
wire around the poles at the planned support 
points. (The correct placement of wire loops 
takes considerable time and delays comple- 
tion of the shelter.) To reduce stresses and 
possible breakage, the loops should be loose, 
as illustrated. 

112 

MAKING A SUSPENDED BEDSHEET-CHAIR 

A Bedsheet-Hammock may be quickly con- 
verted into a comfortable Suspended Bedsheet-Chair 
so that a shelter occupant can sit comfortably, yet 
occupy less floor space during the daytime. Follow 
these steps: 

1. Select one end of the hammock to be the top of 

the back of the chair. 

2. From this end» measure 52 inches (4 ft 4 in.) 
along each side-edge of the hammock (see 
sketch), and mark these two spots. 

3. About 2V2 inches in from these two marks 
(toward the centerline of the hammock), make 
two more marks. 

4. To make an attachment point for a chair "arm", 
hold a pebble (or a lump of earth) under one of 
these last marks, pull the double-thickness cloth 
tight around the pebble, and tie it in place. (See 
illustration.) Repeat on the other side-edge of the 
hammock. 

5. Tie the end of one rope (or "rope"" made of 10- 
inch-wide strip of strong cloth) to one attach- 
ment point, and the end of another rope to the 
other attachment point. 

6. Suspend the top of the back of the chair to a 
suspension point on the ceiling at least 4 inches 
out from the wall, and adjust the length of this 
suspending rope so that the chair arms will be 
about the same height from the floor as the arms 
of an easy chair (see sketch). 

7. Suspend the arms of the chair from two 
suspension points 20 inches apart and 20 inches 
farther cut from the wall than the suspension 
point of the back of the chair. (Study the 
illustration.) 

8. Fold the unused end of the hammeck up and 
back into the "seat" of the chair; fill the hollow of 
the seat with coats, a blanket, or anything else 
soft, to make it comfortable. 

9. Adjust the lengths of all three suspending ropes 
so that the chair seat is the right height for the 
person sitting in it. When both feet are flat on the 
floor, the front edge of the seat should not press 
against the undersides of the thighs. 

10. To simplify repeated conversion of the hammock 
to a chair, mark the spot on each of the 3 

ORNL DWG 77-18432 

SUSPENSION 
POINT ON 
CEILING 

SUSPENDING 
ROPES OF CHAIR 
"ARMS" 

FOLDED EDGE 

ATTACHMENT 
POINT ON A 
CHAIR "ARM" 

ORKL-DWG 77-173<>5 

Vr—SUSPENDING ROPE 

i \ 

SIDE EDGE 

PEBBLE (ABOUT 1" 
DIAMETER) TIED 
UNDER CLOTH 

TIED TIGHTLY WITH 
* STRING 

ATTACHMENT POINT 

suspending ropes where each is tied to its 
suspension point on the ceiling; also mark the 
spot on each suspending rope for a chair arm 
where each is tied to its suspension point on a 
chair arm. If enough light rope or strong cord is 
available, the easiest and quickest way to connect 
and disconnect the arm supports is to suspend 
each arm with a double strand of rope, looped 
around an attachment point as illustrated by the 
sketch of the attachment point. 

Chapter 15 

Improvised Clothing and Protective Items 

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF 
COLD WEATHER CLOTHING 

If Americans would learn to use skillfully the 
ordinary clothing, towels, cloth, newspapers, and 
paper bags in their homes, they could keep warm 
enough to stay healthy—even under much colder 
conditions than they believe endurable without 
specialized outdoor winter clothing. Efficient cold- 
weather clothing can be improvised if the following 
ways of conserving body heat are understood and 
used: 

® Trap "dead" air. Covering enough of your body 
with a thick layer of trapped "dead" air is the basic 
requirement for keeping warm. .1 shows 
how efficient body insulation works: Both the air 
warmed by close contact with the skin and the water 
vapor from evaporated perspiration flow outward 
into the insulating material. Any material that breaks 
up and separates air into spaces no more than I» inch 

ORNL-OWG 77-18426 

WINDBREAKER 
MATERIAL 
(RftPER OR 
TIGHTLY WOVEN 
FABRIC ) 

.1. Efficient body insulation. 

across has efficient cells of "dead" air. Air that is 
within '/i6 inch of any surface—whether that of a 
filament of goose down or of a piece of paper—is 
slowed down by "sticking" to that surface and 
becoming hard to move. Trapped "dead" air moves 
outward very slowly, carrying heat away from the 
body at a slow rate—thus minimizing heat losses by 
convection. 

• Use windbreaker materials. An outer wind- 
breaker layer of clothing that is essentially air-tight, 
such as a brown paper bag worn over a knit wool cap, 
prevents the escape of warmed air and results in an 
insulating layer of trapped "dead" air. A single layer 
of good windbreaker material also prevents cold 
outside air from being blown into the insulating 
material and displacing warmed air (.1). 

The best windbreaker materials permit very little 
air to pass through them, while at the same time they 
allow water vapor to escape. Perspiration that cannot 
be felt or seen on cool skin continually evaporates, 
forming warm water vapor close to the skin. This 
moisture escapes outward through good insulating 
and windbreaker materials; as a result, underlying 
body insulation remains dry and efficient. Water 
vapor can pass readily through many sheets of 
newspaper or unglazed brown paper, although not 
enough wind can flow through a single sheet to be 
felt. 

® Prevent excessive heat losses by conduction. 
Body heat also is lost by conduction—the direct flow 
of heat into a colder material. For example, if one 
sleeps in an excellent goose-down sleeping bag laid 
directly on cold ground, body weight will compress 
the down to a small fraction of an inch. This barrier 
to heat flow is too thin and will cause the body to lose 
heat rapidly to the cold earth. Likewise, the soles of 

113 

14 

ordinary shoes are such poor insulators that standing 
or walking on frozen ground sometimes results in 
frozen feet. 

MINIMIZING HEAT LOSSES 
FROM HEAD AND NECK 

The head and neck of the girl pictured in .2 are insulated almost as well as if she were 
wearing the hood of a skin-side-out Eskimo parka. 
She folded a large, fluffy bath towel and placed it 
over her head, neck, and the upper part of her body. 
A brown paper bag was worn over the towel. The 
edges of the face hole cut in the bag were taped to 
prevent tearing. A strip of cloth was tied around the 
part of the bag over her neck. Such a parka-like 
covering not only is the most efficient way to insulate 
the head and neck but also prevents air warmed by 
the body from escaping upward around the neck. The 
girl also is wearing a man's shirt large enough to cover 
and hold thick newspaper insulation around her 
bodv and arms. 

warmer by insulating his head and neck very well. 
(One difficulty in following this advice is that a well- 
covered head often will feel unpleasantly warm— 
even sweaty—before one's body temperature rises 
enough to increase the warming flow of blood to 
hands and feet.) 

INSULATING THE WHOLE BODY 

Occupants of freezing-cold shelters can keep 
warm enough to sleep without blankets by skillfully 
using ordinary indoor clothing plus paper and pieces 
of cloth to insulate their whole bodies. The girls 
pictured in .3 slept without a blanket in a 
frozen Door-Covered Trench Shelter while the night 
temperature outdoors dropped to 10° F. The shelter's 
ventilation openings were adjusted so that the inside 
temperature remained a few degrees below freezing, 
to prevent frozen earth from melting into icy mud. 
These girls had insulated themselves well. First, they 
covered their cotton shirts and pants with 10 
thicknesses of newspaper wrapped around their 
bodies and tied with strips of cloth. Then around each 
arm and leg they wrapped and tied 8 sheets of 
newspaper, thus insulating their limbs with at least 16 

.2. A bath towel and a paper bag used to 

efficiently insulate head, neck, and shoulders. 

It is very important to prevent heat losses from 
the head and neck, which have many blood vessels 
near the skin surface. Heat losses from these vital 
parts cannot be sensed nearly as well as heat losses 
from other parts of the body. Furthermore, blood 
vessels near the surface in the head and neck do not 
automatically constrict to reduce heat losses, as they 
do in other parts of the body when heat is being lost 
faster than it can be supplied by metabolism. So when 
a person is in the cold—particularly when inac- 
tive—he should keep his hands, feet, and whole body 

.3. Girls wearing expedient clothing are 
prepared for sleeping in the freezing-cold trench 
shelter. 

thicknesses. As an outer covering over their legs, thev 
wrapped wide strips torn from a bedsheet. Their 
expedient foot coverings were of the type described in 
a following paragraph. Their heads and necks were 
insulated with towels covered with brown paper bags. 
Old cotton raincoats allowed water vapor to pass 
through and helped hold in place the insulating 
newspapers, which extended to cover the girls' bare 
hands. 

The girls slept on newspapers spread about an 
inch thick over the gravel floor of the trench. When 
sleeping on cold or frozen ground, it is best to place 
newspapers or other insulation on top of a layer of 
small limb-tips or brush, so that drying air can 
circulate under the bedding. A sheet of plastic under 
bedding will keep it from being dampened by a wet 
floor but will not prevent it from being dampened 
after a few days by condensed water vapor from the 
sleeper's body. 

Newspaper and other paper through which 
water vapor can pass are such good windbreaker 
materials that they can be used under any loose- 
fitting outer garment—even one through which air 
can pass quite readily. They also provide good 
insulation. .4 shows the author coming out 
of an icy shelter at sunup. Many thicknesses of 

115 

newspaper covered my body and arms and extended 
like cuffs from my sleeves. A porous cotton bathrobe 
covered the newspapers and helped hold them in 
place. Because so little heat was lost through this 
clothing, plenty of warm blood continued to flow to 
my bare hands, ridding my body of excess heat by 
radiation. 

IMPROVISED WINTER FOOTWEAR 

Cold-weather footwear that is warmer than all 
but the best-insulated winter boots can be improvised 
readily. The trick is learning how to tie the several 
insulating layers securely in place, so that you could 
hike for miles in the snow if necessary. 

For use in dry snow, first tie a porous insulating 
layer—such as two bath towels or 10 big sheets of 
newspaper—over each shoe. If you have no low- 
heeled shoes, make a paper sole by folding 3 large 
newspaper sheets to make a sole that has 72 
thicknesses of paper. Then proceed in the following 
manner: 

1. Place your foot and the sole on 10 newspaper 

sheets, as pictured in .5. 

.4. The author emerges after a night's sleep in freezing-cold temperatures inside a Car-Over-Trench 

Shelter. Expedient clothing, primarily newspaper insulation, kept him warm without a blanket. 

.5. Insulating a foot with a folded newspaper sole and 10 sheets of newspaper. 

2. Fold all the sheets over the top of your foot while 
keeping the sole in the proper place, as indicated in 
". 5. 

3. Use a strip of cloth about 3 inches wide and 5 feet 
long to tie the papers in front of your ankle with a 
single overhand knot (half of a square knot). With 
the same strip, tie another single overhand knot 
over the tendon behind the ankle. Finally, tie a 
bow knot in front of the ankle. 

4. Cover the insulating layer with a tough fabric, 
such as canvas or burlap sack material; secure 
with a second strip of cloth and tie as described 
above. 

If the snow is wet, place a piece of strong plastic 
film or coated fabric outside the insulating layer, 
after securing it with the first strip of cloth. The outer 
protective covering should be tied over the water- 
proofing, with the second strip of cloth securing both 
it and the waterproofing. (When resting or sleeping in 
a dry place, remove any moistureproof layer in the 
foot coverings, to let your feet dry.) .6 
shows a test subject's waterproofed expedient foot- 
'. covering, held in place as described above, after 
a 2-mile hike in wet snow. His feet were warm, 
and he had not stopped to tighten or adjust the 
cloth strips. 

.6. Expedient water-proofed foot- 
covering, over a newspaper sole and other newspaper 
insulation. 

Persons who have not worked outdoors in icy 
weather seldom realize the importance of warm 
footwear for winter. Russian civil defense manuals 
direct urban citizens to take winter boots with them 
when thev evacuate, even in summer. 

KEEPING WARM WITHOUT FIRE 

® If occupants of a cold room or shelter lack 
adequate clothing and bedding, all should lie close 
together. 

® Always place some insulating material between 
your body and a cold floor. (Pieces of shag rug are 
excellent.) Plastic film should be placed under the 
insulating material if the ground is damp. 

• Go to bed or put on all your body insulation 
before you begin to feel cold. Once the loss of body 
heat causes blood vessels in your hands and feet to 
constrict, it often is hard to get these vessels to return 
to normal dilation again. 

• Do not jump up and down or wave your arms to 
get or to keep warm. The windchill factor is a 
measure of air movement over your skin; rapid body 
movements always cause some such air movement. If 
practical, lie down and cover up; then do muscular 
tension exercises by repeatedly tightening all your 
muscles so tight that you tremble. 

• Prevent sweating and the dampening of insula- 
tion by taking off or opening up clothing as you begin 
to exercise, before you begin to sweat. 

• If you are getting cold, don't smoke. Nicotine 
causes blood vessels to constrict and the flow of 
blood to hands and feet to be reduced. 

© Don't drink an alcoholic beverage to warm 
yourself. Alcohol causes increased blood flow close 
to the skin surface, resulting in rapid loss of body 
heat. It is impossible for alcohol to make up for such 
loss for very long. 

RAINWEAR 

All that is needed to make serviceable, impro- 
vised rainwear is waterproof material and waterproof 
tape. Plastic film from large trash bags will do; 4-mil 
polyethylene is better; tough, lightweight, coated 
fabric is best. Fabric duct tape is the best widely 
available tape. 

.7 shows a pair of improvised rain 
chaps. Rain chaps are separate leg coverings, each 
with a loop to suspend it from one's belt and usually 
made large enough to be pulled on and off over the 
shoes and trousers. Rain chaps are better than 
waterproof trousers for working or walking while 
wearing a poncho or raincoat, because body 
movements cause drying air to be literally pumped 
under the chaps. This air keeps trousers and legs dry, 
and therefore warmer. 

17 

.7. Improvised rain chaps made of trash- 

bag polyethylene and freezer tape. 

In the same way, a poncho or rain cape will allow 
plenty of air to reach the garments under them while 
one is working. When exercise is stopped, clothing 
underneath will stay dry and warm for some time. 

SANDALS 

Shoes are almost always in short supply for 
years following a disastrous war. Except in very cold 
weather, sandals can be made to serve quite well. The 
best sandal designs for hard work and serious 
walking have a strap around the heel and in front of 
the ankle, with no thong between the toes (.8). 

.8. A Ho Chi Minh Sandal, excellent 
Vietnamese expedient footwear. Rubber bands cut 
from an inner tube have been inserted into a sole of 
auto-tire tread. 

118 

Such sandals also have the advantage of enabling one 
to wear socks and other foot insulation inside the 
straps. 

CLOTHING TO PROTECT AGAINST 
BETA BURNS 

If fresh and very radioactive fallout particles 
remain for long on the skin or extremely close to the 
skin, beta burns result. Any clothing that keeps 
fallout off the skin helps greatly. The best expedient 
protection is given by an outer layer of easily 
removable clothing similar to the improvised 
rainwear previously described, but fully covering the 
hair and neck and providing plastic trousers instead 
of chaps. Removable shoe coverings are highly 
advisable. All such protective coverings should be 
removed before entering a shelter, or removed in the 
entryway before going into the shelter room. 

If a person has fallout particles on clothing that 
he must continue to wear, he should vigorously brush 
his outer clothing before entering a shelter room. If 
fallout particles are washed off, rinsed off, or 
otherwise removed from the skin within- a few 
minutes, no beta burns will result. 

A few days after a nuclear explosion, fallout 
particles are not radioactive enough to cause beta 
burns. In areas of heavy fallout, the danger from 
external doses of gamma radiation from fallout on 
the ground will continue much longer than will the 
risk of beta burns from some of these same fallout 
particles. 

The gamma rays given off by fallout particles 
brought into a shelter on clothing or bodies would 
subject shelter occupants to gamma doses so small as 
to be of no significance by wartime standards. Nor 
would shelter occupants be endangered by radiation 
from the body of a person who, before reaching 
shelter, had received a gamma dose large enough to 
kill him many times over. Except in science fiction 
stories, the body of such a person does not become 
"radioactive." ' 

FALLOUT MASKS 

For the majority of Americans in most fallout 
areas, methods for filtering fallout particles out of the 
air they breathe would not be necessary.18 Almost all 
fallout particles small enough to reach one's lungs 
would slowly fall to earth thousands of miles away 
from big nuclear explosions. 

are mixed with dust and sand that is being blown into 
a shelter, then persons in windy areas who occupy 
small belowground expedient shelters should cover 
their noses and mouths with several thicknesses of 
towels or other cloth. Those who have dust masks 
should wear them, especially when working outside 
in dry, windy weather soon after fallout deposition. 
The danger would not be from getting radioactive 
particles in the lungs, but from the possibility of beta 
burns caused by fallout particles that would collect in 
the nasal passages, and from swallowed fallout 
particles. (Much of the substance continuously 
eliminated from the nasal passage is swallowed.) 

Making a homemade dust and fallout mask is a 
low-priority survival task, even in a desert. The 
instructions for making the homemade mask given 
below are for an improved mask based on a Russian 
design (.9). This mask is the best of several 

OR NL-DWG 78-11921 

ELASTIC 

ELASTIC 

(CLOTH 
COVERING 
HEAD AND 
NECK IS 
NOT 
SHOWN) 

POINTS Y AND 
Y'. DIRECTLY 
ABOVE ADAM'S 
APPLE 

1 1/4 

TOP OF j, 
EYE -L- 
SOCKET *» 

5 1/2X2 1/4 -in. 

PIECE OF CLEAR 
PLASTIC STITCHED 
ON TOP OF BOTH 
EYE HOLES 

UPPER 
STITCH LINE 

3 THICKNESSES 
OFTERRYCLOTH 
TOWELING 

NOTE: DIMENSIONS ARE IN INCHES 

Persons living in dry, windy areas often wear 
dust masks and goggles to protect their noses and 
eyes from dust and sand particles. If fallout particles 

.9. A Russian-type homemade fallout 
mask. For most people, this would be a low-priority 
item. 

homemade types, and the following instructions for 
making and using it have been field-tested. 

thick. Stitch around all four edges of the cloth 
rectangle and down the centerline. 

AN INDIVIDUALLY-FITTED 
FALLOUT MASK 

Materials Needed: 

1. Three rectangular pieces of fluffy toweling (terry 
cloth preferred), each piece approximately 12 X 15 
inches (or use 10 men's handkerchiefs). 

2. Elastic. (The best expedient elastic is from the 

waistband of a man's undershorts.) 

3. Clear plastic (from a photo album, billfold, plastic 

storm window, etc.). 

4. Sewing materials. 

Measurements: 

1. Tie a string vertically around your head and face, 
passing it % inch in front of each of your ears and 
making it quite tight. 

2. Tie a second string horizontally around your 
head, crossing your forehead 1 % inches above the 
top of your eye sockets. These two strings should 
cross each other at points X and X1, over your 
temples. 

3. Measure the distance X-to-X1 across your 
forehead and the distance X-to-X1 going under 
your chin (around your lower jaw and next to your 
throat), as indicated by .9. 

Construction: 

1. Cut out 3 pieces of terry cloth, making the width of 
each piece equal to X-to-X1 (the curved distance 
across your forehead), and the height of each piece 
equal to the distance X-to-Y plus % inch—that is, 
equal to half the distance X-to-X1 (measured 
under your chin) plus % inch. See .9. 

4. Mark and cut out the eye holes, as illustrated. 
Make the mask's dimensions smaller for children. 

5. Cut one rectangle of clear plastic measuring 
5V2X2V4 inches, and sew this plastic over the 
outside of the eye holes, stitching the plastic 
around its edges and down the centerline. 

6. Fold the three pieces along their vertical center- 
line and stitch the lower side together, along the 
upper stitch line Y-to-Yl. Stitch V2 inch from the 
lower edge. Then sew a second row of stitches. 

7. Sew on the elastic head bands, making them short 
enough to hold the mask tightly around your face. 
If the elastic is from the waistband of a man's 
undershorts, use a doubled elastic both over the 
top of your head and around the back of your 
head. Make these elastic pieces so short that you 
can just put all your fingers comfortably between 
the elastic and your head when the pieces are fully 
stretched. If using a weaker elastic, be sure to 
adjust the lengths to a tight fit, to prevent air leaks 
under the edges of the mask. Because of the 
thickness of material where the elastics are 
connected to the upper Corners of the mask, it may 
be necessary to do this stitching by hand. 

8. To keep fallout particles off your head and neck, 
sew a loose-fitting piece of bedsheet cloth (not 
illustrated) to the edges of the mask that fit around 
your face. This cloth should extend back over 
your head and down over your collar, over which 
it can be tied. 

Use: 

Put on the mask by first placing it over your 
chin, then pulling the back elastic down to fit around 
the back of your head. 

2. Cut the lower edge of each piece as illustrated. 

CAUTION: 

3. Stitch the 3 pieces of terry cloth together, one on 
top of the other, thus making the mask three layers 

To avoid spreading infections, <^ach mask should 

be labeled and worn by only one person. 

Chapter 16 

Minimum Pre-Crisis Preparations 

Your chances of surviving a nuclear attack will 
be improved if you make the following low-cost 
preparations before a serious crisis arises. Once many 
Americans become convinced that a nuclear attack is 
a near certainty, they will rush to stores and buy all 
available survival supplies. If you wait to prepare 
until a crisis does arise, you are likely to be among the 
majority who will have to make-do with inadequate 
supplies of water containers, food, and materials. 
Furthermore, even if you have the necessary 
materials and instructions to make the most needed 
survival items, you and your family are not likely to 
have time to make all of them during a few days of 
tense crisis. 

The following recommendations are intended 
primarily for the majority who live in areas likely to 
be subjected to blast, fire, or extremely heavy fallout. 
These people should plan to evacuate to a safer area. 
(Many citizens living outside high-risk areas, 
especially homeowners with yards, can and should 
make better pre-crisis preparations. These would 
include building high-protection-factor permanent 
shelters covered with earth.) 

SHELTER 

Keep on hand the tools and materials your 
family or group will need to build or improve a high- 
protection-factor expedient shelter: One or more 
shovels, a pick (if in a hard-soil area), a bow-saw with 
an extra blade, a hammer, and 4-mil polyethylene 
film for rainproofing your planned shelter. Also store 
the necessary nails, wire, etc. needed for the kind of 
shelter you plan to build. 

Keep instructions for shelter-building and other 

survival essentials in a safe and convenient place. 

VENTILATION-COOLING 

Make a homemade shelter-ventilating pump, a 
KAP, of the size required for the shelter you plan to 
build or use. 

WATER 

Keep on hand water containers (including at 
least four 30-gallon untreated polyethylene trash 
bags and two sacks or pillowcases for each person), a 
pliable garden hose or other tube for siphoning, and a 
plastic bottle of sodium hypochlorite bleach (such as 
Clorox) for disinfecting water and utensils. 

FALLOUT METER 

Make one or two KFMs and learn how to use 

this simple instrument. 

FOOD "-' 

i 

Store at least a (2-week supply of compact, non- 
perishable food. The balanced ration of basic dry 
foods described in Chapter 9, Food, satisfies 
requirements for adults and larger children at 
minimum cost. If your family includes babies or 
small children, be sure to store more milk powder, 
vegetable oil, and sugar. 

Continuing to breast-feed babies boin during an 
impending crisis would greatly simplify their care 
should the crisis develop and worsen. 

For preparing and cooking basic foods: 

• Make a 3-Pipe Grain Mill like the one described 
in Chapter 9, Food, or buy a small hand-cranked 
grain mill, which grinds more efficiently than other 
expedient devices. 

Preceding page Man* 

121 

122 

• Make a Bucket-Stove as described in Chapter 9. 
During evacuation, the stove can be used as a 
container. Store some kitchen-type wooden matches 
in a waterproof container. 

• Keep essential containers and utensils on hand 
for storing and transporting food and for cooking 
and serving in a shelter. 

SANITATION 

A hose-vented 5-gallon can, with heavy plastic 
bags for liners, for use as a toilet. Include some 
smaller plastic bags and toilet paper with these 
supplies. 

MEDICINES 

last section of Chapter 13, Survival Without 
Doctors.) 

* A first-aid kit and a tube of antibiotic ointment. 

LIGHT 

© Long-burning candles (with small wicks) suffi- 
cient for at least 14 nights. 

<* An expedient lamp, with extra cotton-string, 
wicks, and cooking oil as described in Chapter 11. 

■© A flashlight and extra batteries. 

RADIO 

A transistor radio with extra batteries and a 

metal box in which to protect it. 

• Any special medications needed by family 
members. 

OTHER ESSENTIALS 

© Potassium iodide, a 2-oz bottle, and a medicine- 
dropper, for prophylactic protection of the thyroid 
gland against radioactive iodines. (Described in the 

Review the EVACUATION CHECKLIST (de- 
veloped primarily for persons who make no prepa- 
rations before a crisis) and add items that are special 
requirements of your family. 

Appendix A 
Instructions for Six Expedient Fallout Shelters 

SHELTER-BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

The following step-by-step instructions for 
building 6 types of earth-covered expedient shelters 
have enabled untrained families to build even the 
most difficult of these shelters in less than 2 days. The 
only families who took longer—up to 4 days—were 
the few who were delayed by very heavy rains. Each 
of these shelters has been built by several different 
families or groups of families. Only widely available 
materials and hand tools are required. They have 
been built under simulated crisis conditions in 
environments typical of large regions of the United 
States: covered-trench types have been built in 
forested clay hills of Tennessee, in a bare Colorado 
valley in snowy November, in an irrigated Utah valley 
in hot August. Most of the aboveground shelters were 
built by families in Florida, where the water table is 
within 18 inches of the surface. 

All of these test families used instructions that 
contained general guidance to help inexperienced 
persons build almost any type of earth-covered 
shelter. In this appendix, general instructions which 
apply to all types of shelters will be given first, to 
avoid repetition. (However, if the instructions for 
building one type of shelter are reproduced 
separately, the pertinent parts of these general 
instructions should be given before the step-by-step 
instructions for building that shelter. For easy-to- 
read reproduction in a newspaper, the detailed shelter 
drawings first should be photo-enlarged about 
50%.) 

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING 
AN EXPEDIENT SHELTER 

found it helpful first to read the instructions 
aloud and then to discuss problems and work 
assignments.) 

2. Sharpen all tools, including picks and shovels. 
Dull tools waste time and energy. If no file is 
available, tools can be sharpened by rubbing 
them hard on concrete or a rough stone. 

3. Wear gloves from the start. Blisters can lead to 
serious infections, especially if antibiotics cannot 
be obtained. 

4. Whenever practical, select a building site that: 

® Will not be flooded if heavy rains occur or if 
a large dam farther up a major valley is destroyed 
by a nuclear explosion. 

• Is in the open and at least 50 ft away from a 
building or woods that might be set afire by the 
thermal pulse from an explosion tens of miles 
away. (Keep well away from even a lone tree; it is 
hard to dig through roots.) 

• ■ Has earth that is firm and stable, if the 
planned shelter is to be a trench type with 
unshored (unsupported) earth walls. To make 
sure that the earth is firm and stable enough so 
that the walls will not cave in, make a "thumb- 
test" by digging an 18-in.-deep hole and trying to 
push your bare thumb into the undisturbed earth 
at the bottom. If you can push your thumb no 
farther than 1 in., the earth should be safe 
enough. If the earth does not pass the thumb-test, 
move to another location and repeat the test. Or 
build a belowground shelter with shored walls, 
or an aboveground shelter. 

1. Read all the instructions and study the drawings 
before beginning work. (Most families have 

® Has a sufficient depth of earth above rock or 
the water table for a trench to be dug to the depth 

123 

shelter roof, fill it so that it will be only about 
two-thirds full after its opening is tied shut 
securely. Avoid dropping the sandbag. 

12. If sufficient sandbags are not available, make 
earth-filled "rolls." Bed sheets or any reasonably 
strong fabric or plastic film can be used to make 
these rolls as described below. (To make a longer 
roll than the one illustrated below, several 
persons should make one together, standing side- 
by-side.) 

To make an 8-in -high earth-filled roll: 

(1) Select a piece of cloth at least as strong as a 
new bed sheet, 2 ft longer than the side of the 
opening to be protected, and 5 ft wide. 

(2) Place 2 ft of the width of the cloth on the 
I ground, as illustrated. 
\ 

ORNL-DWG 78-16213 

124 

required, (To find out, try to dig a pit to the 
required depth before excavating the whole 
trench. Or, if you are quite sure there is no water- 
table problem, try driving down a sharpened rod 
or pipe to the required depth in several places 
along the planned length of the trench.) 

5. If the shelter must be built on sloping ground, 
locate it with its length crosswise to the direction 
of the slope 

6. Before staking out the shelter, clear the ground of 
brush, weeds and tall grass over an area 
extending about 10 ft beyond the planned edges 
of the excavation. (If loose earth is shoveled onto 
tall plants, the earth will be difficult to shovel the 
second time when covering the completed shelter 
roof.) 

7. Stake out the complete shelter, and then dig by 

removing layers of earth. 

8. When digging earth that is too firm to shovel 
without first breaking it up, start picking (or 
breaking with a shovel) in a line across the center 
of the trench. Next, shovel out a narrow trench 6 
or 8 in. deep all the way across the width of the 
trench. Then with pick or shovel break off row 
after row of earth all the way across the width of 
the trench, as illustrated. 

ORWL-DWG 78-18312 

When digging a trench, to avoid having to move 
the excavated earth twice more to get it out of the 
way, first pile all earth about 8 ft away from the 
trench. Later, pile additional earth you are 
excavating at least 3 ft away. 

10. 

Never risk a cave-in by digging into lower parts of 
an earth wall. It is dangerous to produce even a 
small overhanging section of wall or to dig a 
small, cave-like enlargement of a shelter. 

(3) While using both hands to hold up and pull 
on 3 ft of the width of the cloth and pressing 
against the cloth with your body, have 
another person shovel earth onto and against 
the cloth. 

11 

When making a "sandbag" of a pillowcase or 
sack to hold earth shielding in place around the 
sides of shelter openings or along the edges of a 

(4) While still pulling on the cloth, pull the upper 
part down over the earth that covers the 
lower part of the cloth. 

(5) Cover the upper part of the cloth with earth 
so as to form an earth-filled "hook" near the 
upper edge, as illustrated. 

ORNL-DWG 78-16214 

SLOPE EARTH TO DRAIN 

DRAIN 

nit 

:/'iTt,S 

..*■-'« 

-CLOTH 

FINISHED 8 in. ROLL 

? 

(6) If a greater thickness of rolls is needed, level 
the earth on top of a roll; then make another 
earth-filled roll on this level surface. 

13. Cut and haul poles and logs more easily by doing 

the following: 

(1) Take time to sharpen your tools before 
starting to work—no matter how rushed you 
feel. 

(2) When sawing green trees that have gummy 
resin or sap, oil your saw with kerosene or 
diesel fuel. If you don't have these, use motor 
oil, grease, or even soap. 

(3) When felling a small tree, the following 
method will help make a square cut, keep 
your saw from being pinched, and help make 
the tree fall in the desired direction: (a) Saw 
the tree about one-third through on the side 
toward which you want it to fall, (b) Then 
start sawing the opposite side, while another 
person pushes on the tree with a 10-ft push- 
pole, pressing the end of the push-pole 
against the tree about 10 ft above the ground. 
A push-pole with a forked end—or with a big 
nail on the end—is best. 

(4) After a tree has been felled, trim off all limbs 
and knots so that the pole or log is smooth 
and will require no additional smoothing 

ORNL-OWG 7*18210 

125 

when you get ready to move it, or to use it for 
building your shelter. Make and use a 
measuring stick to speed up measuring and 
cutting poles and logs to the right lengths. 

(5) It usually is best first to cut the poles exactly 
two or three times the final length of the poles 
to be used in the shelter. 

(6) When you are ready to move the poles to the 
shelter site, drag them rather than trying to 
carry them on your shoulders. Shouldering 
them is more tiring, and you could injure 
yourself severely if you should trip. 

To drag a log or several poles by hand: (a) Cut a 
stick 2 to 2 li in. in diameter and about 3 % ft long; (b) 
Tie a short piece of '/4-in. (or stronger) rope to'the 
center of the stick; (c) Make a lasso-like loop at the 
free end of the rope, so that when it is looped around 
the log and two people are pulling (see illustration), 
the front end of the log is raised about 6 in. above the 
ground. The loop should be tightened around the log 
about 2 ft. from its end, so that the end of the log 
cannot hit the backs of the legs of the two people 
pulling it. 

ORNL-OWG 78-16211 

CAUTION: If you drag a log down «■> steep hill, one 
person should tie a rope to the rear end of the log, and 
then follow the dragger, ready to act as the brake if 
needed. 

LIMB CUT OFF, TO HOOK OVER THE SQUARE-CUT ENO OF THE POLE. 

0ESIHED POLE LENGTH ■ 

1 

(7) When you get the poles or logs to the location 
where you will build the shelter, cut them to 
the desired minimum diameters and specified 
lengths, and put all those of one specified 

126 

type together. Be sure that the diameter of the 
small end of each pole of one type is at least as 
large as the minimum diameter specified for 
its type. Make and use a measuring stick, as 
previously described. 

14. Use snow for shielding material for aboveground 
shelters if the earth is so deep-frozen that digging 
is imoractical. For a Ridge Pole Shelter (see 
Appendix A.5), cover the entire shelter with 5 ft 
of wetted or well-packed enow. For a Crib- 
Walled Shelter (see Appendix A.6), fill the cribs 
and then cover and surround the entire shelter 
with snow at least 5 ft thick. With wetted or well- 
packed snow 5 ft thick, the protection factor is 
about 50. Families have completed these winter 
shelters within 2 days. 

Several hundred pounds of snow can be 
moved at a time by sledding it on a piece of 
canvas or other strong material 6 to 8 ft wide. 
Attach a stick across one end of the material and 
tie a rope to the ends of the stick, so as to form a 
"Y" bridle on which a person can pull. 

To keep the occupants of a snow-covered 
expedient shelter dry and tolerably warm in sub- 
freezing weather, provide sufficient ventilation 
openings to maintain inside temperatures at a 
few degrees below freezing. (See Chapter 14, 
Expedient Clothing.) 

15. Make a reliable canopy over the shelter entry. By 
following the instructions given in Fig. A on the 
following page, you can make a dependable 

canopy that ordinary winds will neither tear nor 
blow' down and that will not catch 
rainwater—even if you have no waterproof 
material stronger than 4-mil polyethylene film. 

16. Take to your shelter enough window screen or 
mosquito netting to cover its openings. Except in 
freezing-cold weather, flies and mosquitoes 
would soon become a problem in most localities 
soon after an attack. 

17. Work to complete (1) an expedient ventilating- 
" cooling pump (a KAP) and (2) the storage of at 
least 15 gallons of water per person. This work 
should be accomplished by the time your shelter 
is completed. Especially in an area of heavy 
fallout during warm or hot weather, an earth- 
covered, high-protection-factor shelter when full 
of people would be useless unless adequately 
ventilated and cooled and provided with enough 
water. 

18. In cold weather, restrict air flow through the 
shelter by hanging curtains of plastic or tightly 
woven fabric, or by otherwise partially 
obstructing its two openings. Always be sure to 
leave at least a few square inches open at the floor 
level of one opening and at the ceiling height of 
the other, to provide enough ventilation to 
prevent a harmful concentration of exhaled 
carbon dioxide. To prevent exhaled water vapor 
from wetting clothing and bedding and reducing 
its insulating value, keep the ventilation openings 
as wide open as possible without causing shelter 
temperatures to be intokrably-rold. 

127 

a 
u 

u > 

o 

w 
3 
o 
g 
u 

T3 
C 
t8 
->^ 
3 
O 

a 
u 
4) 

Q -1 > 

. z < r- u. 

P K n- U 

S H S u) O 

£ 3 „ ot- 

O £C CO 
£ o < 

itSoife 

Appendix A.l 
Door-Covered Trench Shelter 

(See illustration at the end of Appendix A.l) 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 250 
(PF 250)—a person in the open outside this shelter 
would receive 250 times as much fallout radiation as 
he would if inside. 

Against blast: Better protection than most 
homes, if built in very stable earth. Blast tests have 
indicated that this shelter would be undamaged up to 
at least the 5-psi overpressure range from large 
explosions. Without blast doors, the shelter's 
occupants could be injured at this overpressure 
range, although probably not fatally. 

Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant from 
fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic smoke. 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

In a situation where at least one hollow-core 
door per occupant is available. (A family evacuating 
in a pickup truck or large station wagon can carry 
enough doors, with doorknobs removed.) 

In very stable earth, where neither the water 
table nor rock is less than 4% ft below the surface. 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For a family or other group with two or more 

members able to work hard for most of 36 hours. 

CAPACITY 

The shelter illustrated is roofed with 3 doors and 
is the minimum length for 3 persons. (If you have 
additional doors, or boards and sticks at least 3 ft 
long, make the entry way trenches 3 or 4 ft longer than 
illustrated—if not pressed for time.) 

For each additional person, add an additional 
door. (If more than about 7 persons are to be 
sheltered, build two or more separate shelters.) 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Before beginning work, study the drawings and 

read ALL of the following instructions. 

2. Divide the work; CHECK OFF EACH STEP 

WHEN COMPLETED. 

3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed (1) a ventilating pump (a KAP 16 in. 
wide and 28 in. high), essential for this shelter 
except in cool weather, and (2) the storage of at 
least 15 gallons of water per occupant (see 
Appendix B and Chapter 8). 

4. Start to assemble materials and tools that are 

listed for the illustrated 3-person shelter. 

A. Essential Materials and Tools for a 3-Person 

Shelter 

9 Three hollow-core doors. 

® A shovel (and a phk. if the earth is very 
hard). 

® Two to three square yaids per person of 
waterproof materials for ainproofing the 
roof. Use materials such■ as 4-mil polyeth- 
ylene film, shower curtains, plastic table- 
cloths, plastic mattress covers, or canvas. 

® Two pieces of plastic or tightly woven 
cloth (each about 6% X -6% ft) to make 
canopies over the two shelter openings. Also 
sticks and cords or strips of cloth to support 

129 

130 

the canopies—as described in Fig. A of the 
introductory section of this appendix. 

• Materials and tools for building a simple 
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 16 in. wide 
and 28 in. high. (See Appendix B.) Only in 
cold or continuously breezy, cool weather 
can tolerable temperatures and humidities be 
maintained in a crowded underground 
shelter without an air pump. 

■* Containers for storing adequate water. 
(See Chapter 8.) 

B. Useful Materials and Tools 

• Large cans, buckets, and /or pots with 
bail handles—in which to carry earth and 
later to store drinking water or human 
wastes. 

• Two pillowcases and one bedsheet per 
person—to make "sandbags" around shelter 
openings and to cover trench walls. (If 
available, large sheets of 4-mil polyethylene 
are better than bedsheets, because they keep 
earth walls damp and stable. They also help 
keep shelter occupants dry and clean and 
prevent earth from falling into their eyes.) 

• File, knife, pliers, hammer. 

•• Measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler. 

• Expedient life-support items. 

5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL 

TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 

6. Wear gloves from the start—even tough hands 
can blister and become painful and infected after 
hours of digging. 

7. Check to be sure the earth is stable and firm 
enough so that a trench shelter with unshored 
(unsupported), vertical earth walls will be safe 
from cave-ins. (Interior doors are not strong 
enough to roof an earth-covered trench wider 
than 3 ft.) 

As a test of the stability of earth, dig a small 
hole about 18 in. deep. Remove all loose earth 
from the bottom of the hole. Then make a 
"thumb test" by pushing your bare thumb into 
the undisturbed surface at the bottom of the hole. 
If you can push your thumb into the earth no 
farther than one inch, the earth should be 
suitable for this type of shelter. If the earth does 

not pass the "thumb test." move to another 
location and try the test again. Continue to 
relocate and repeat until suitable earth is 
found, or build a shored-trench or aboveground 
shelter. 

8. Prepare to dig a vertical-walled trench 4'/2 ft deep 
and 3 ft wide. To determine the length of the 
trench, add together the widths of all the doors to 
be used for roofing it, then subtract 8 in. from the 
sum. (To avoid arithmetical errors, it is best to 
lay all the doors side by side on the ground.) 

9. Clear any brush, grass, or weeds that are more 
than a few inches high from the area where the 
trench will be dug. Also clear the ground around 
all sides of the trench, to a distance of about 8 ft 
from the sides and ends of the trench. 

10. Stake out a rectangular trench 36 in. wide, with 
its length as determined above. Also stake out the 
entrance at one end, as illustrated in Fig. A.l at 
the end of Appendix A.l, and the ventilation 
trench and opening at the other. 

11. Dig the main trench, the entry way trench, and 
the ventilation trench. Place the excavated earth 
along both lengthwise sides of the trench, 
starting at the outside edges of the cleared space. 
Be sure that no earth is piled closer than 3 ft to the 
sides of the trench. 

12. To be sure that unstable, unsafe earth is not 
encountered at depths below 18 in., repeat the 
"thumb test" each time the trench is deepened an 
additional foot. If the earth does not pass the test, 
do not dig the trench any deeper; try another 
location. 

13. To keep each trench its full width as it is dug, cut 
a stick 36 in. long and another 18 in. long; use 
them repeatedly from the start to check the. 
widths of the main trench and the entry trenches. 
Keeping the trenches full width will save much 
work and time later. 

14. Carefully level and smooth the ground to a 
distance of 2'/2 ft from the sides of the trench, so 
that the doors will lie flat on the ground up to the 
edges of the trench. 

15. If plenty of sheets, bedspreads, plastic, and /or 
other materials are available, cover the trench 
walls with them. Wall coverings should stop one 
inch from the floor of the trench to prevent their 
being stepped on and pulled down. Plastic wall 
coverings keep some types of damp earth walls 
from drying out and crumbling. 

16. To rainproof the shelter and to prevent the 
roofing doors from being dampened and 
weakened, use available waterproof materials as 
follows: 

a. If the earth is dry, the easiest and best way to 
make a rainproof roof is to place the doors 
directly on the ground, with each of the end 
doors overlapping an end of the main trench 
by 4 or 5 in. (Be sure again to level the ground 
surface as you place each door, so that each 
lies flat against the ground all the way to the 
edges of the trench.) Next, mound dry earth 
over the doors. First place a few inches of 
earth on the doors near their ends; then 
mound it about 12 in. deep above the 
centerline of the trench. Slope the earth to 
both sides so as to just cover the ends of the 
doors. Next, smooth off the earth mound, 
being careful to remove sharp stones that 
might puncture rainproof materials. Then 
place waterproof material over the smooth 
mound, making the "buried roof shown in 
Fig. A. 1. Finally, carefully mound an addi- 
tional 12 to 15 in. ofearth on top of the buried 
roof, again placing it first over the doors near 
their ends. The earth over the trench should 
be at least 2 ft thick, so that effective earth 
arching will support most of the weight of the 
earth covering and will provide considerable 
protection if struck by blast. 

b. If the earth is wet, place the waterproof 
material directly on top of the doors, to keep 
them dry and strong. To make water run off 
this waterproof covering and to keep water 
from collecting on a horizontal surface and 
leaking through, slope the doors toward one 
side of the trench by first making one side of 
the trench about 3 in. higher than the other 
side. A way to raise one side—without 
increasing the distance the doors must 
span—is to place an earth-f'lled "roil" of 
bedsheets or other material along one edge of 
the trench. To keep the waterproof material 
used to cover the doors from sliding down the 
slope of the doors when earth is shoveled on, 
tuck the upper edge of the material under the 
higher ends of the doors. Finally, mound 
earth over the doors, first placing it near their 
ends. The mound should be at least 2 ft deep 
above the centerline of the roof and about 3 or 
4 in. deep over both ends of the doors. 

13! 

If more waterproof material is available than 
is required to make a buried roof (or to cover 
the doors) and to make the illustrated 
canopies over the two shelter openings, use 
this excess material to cover the wet ground 
on which the doors are placed. 

17. To be able to place an adequate thickness of 
shielding earth all the way to and around the 
entryway and ventilation hole, stack improvised 
"sandbags" around these two openings before 
placing the earth on the roof. Or use cloth or 
plastic material to make "rolls" of earth, as 
illustrated in the introductory section of Appen- 
dix A. 

18. Shovel earth around the rolls, sandbags, or other 
means used to raise the level of the earth a round 
the two shelter openings. Slope this earth 
outward, and pack it, so that rainwater on the 
ground cannot run into the shelter. 

19. Dig small drainage ditches around the completed 

shelter, to lead runoff water away. 

20. To keep rain and/ or sand-like fallout particles 
from falling into the shelter openings, build an 
open-sided canopy over each opening, as 
illustrated in Fig. A, shown in the introductory 
section of Appendix A. 

21. Install the air pump (a KAP) in the shelter 
opening into which air is already naturally 
moving. 

22. If the shelter has a KAP, protection against 
radiation can be increased by placing containers 
of water and of heavy foods, or bags ofearth, so 
as to partially block the openings. This would 
still permit adequate air to be pumped through 
the shelter, except in very hot weather. 

23. For seats, place water and food containers, 
bedding, etc., along the side of the trench that is 
farther from the off-center entry trenches. If the 
trench floor is damp, covering it with a 
waterproof material, tree. Htubs, or brush will 
help. 

24. Fill all available water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 

132 

you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

25. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve your chances of surviving by doing the 

following things if possible: (1) Make a home- 
made fallout meter, as described in Appendix C. 
(2) Make expedient lights. 

n<L ems n-umn 

PLACE "ROLLS" m en 
"S*ND9AGS"(S>0« ALL 

SICES OF OPENI«! 

BOARDS OR STICKS 

OPENING OF VENTILATIOU 
TREBCH 

OeAlttME DITCH 
oa tu. sates 

LINK3G 
SHEET 03 PLASTIC 
(EDSE im. ABOVE FLOOR) 

BASE VENTILAT*» TRENCH 
SSh.lFBO*BtBOS 
STICKS ME AV*JLAtLE. 

OPEN-SIDED CANOPY TO KEEP ttLLOUT 
WO RAIN OUT 0? VENTILATIOM HOLE. 

CANOPY OPEN 
ALL SIOES 

IF TIME PERMITS »NO ENOUGH 
ROOFIHG MATERIALS FOR KMit-WIDC 
TRENCHES ME AVAILABLE (TWO 
ADDITIONAL DOORS, OR BOARDS 
OR STICKS AT LEAST 4«t LONG) 
HAKE BOTH ENTRANCE TRENCH 
AND VENTILATION TRENCH ABOUT 
SO*. LONGER, FOR INCREASED 
PROTECTION. 

PICTORIAL VIEW B-B 
ISHOWINO EARTH HOUND REMOVED FOR A CUTAHKT 
VIE» OF ENTRANCE AND VENTILATION HOLE.) 
S ■> SANDBAGS , R "- PLASTIC ROLLS 

RAINPROOF 
"BURIED ROOF", 

CORD ^tiaC, 
TO STAKE >*■- %,zfcll 

OPEN-SOED CANOPY TO KEEP FALLOUT AND 
RAINFALL OUT OF OPENING. CANOPY IS 
RAISED IF SHIELDING IS RAISED. 

OPEN-SIDED 

4!2n. ^VT-^ I ^«^ CANOPY 

IF TIME AND MATERIALS ACE AVAIL- 
ABLE AFTER COBPLETIMG THE SMELTER,' 
MAKE THE SHIELDING AROUND THE 
ENTRYWAY 12'n. HIGHER-AS INDICATED 
BY THE DASHED LINES FOR ADDITIONAL 
SANDBAGS. 

THRESHOLD BOARD 

,' FL005 SLIGHTLY 

TOtWRD ENTRY 

SECTION B-B 

Fig. A.l. Door-Covered Trench Shelter. 

Appendix A.2 
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

» 
Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 300 
(PF 300)—a person in the open outside this shelter 
would receive 300 times more fallout radiation than 
he would if he were inside. 

Against blast: Quite good protection if built in 
stable earth. Blast tests have indicated that this 
shelter, if built in stable earth, would not be seriously 
damaged by blast effects of large explosions at least 
up to the 7-psi overpressure range. (At 7 psi, most 
buildings would be demolished.) Without blast 
doors, occupants of the shelter could be injured, 
although probably not fatally. 

Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant 
from fires producing carbon monoxide and toxic 
smoke. 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

In wooded areas with small trees, for builders 
who have an ax or a bow saw, crosscut or chain saw, 
and digging tools. Or in any location where the 
necessary poles may be obtained. 

In stable earth, where the water table or rock is 

more than 4% ft below the surface. 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For a family or other group with two or more 

members able to work hard for most of 2 days. 

CAPACITY 

The shelter illustrated is the minimum length 
recommended for 4 persons. For each additional 
person, add at least 2% ft to the length of the shelter 
room. If more than about 10 persons are to be 
sheltered, build 2 or more separate shelters. 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Before beginning work, study the drawings 
and read ALL of the following instructions. 
Divide the work so that some people will be 
digging while others are cutting and hauling 
poles. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN 
COMPLETED. 

2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed: (1) a ventilating pump, and (2) the 
storage of at least 15 gallons of drinking water 
per occupant (see Appendix B and Chapter 8). 

3. Start to assemble materials and tools. Those 
listed are for the illustrated 4-person shelter with 
a room 11 ft long. 

A. Essential Materials and Tools 

® Saw (bow saw or crosscut preferred) 
and/ or ax for cutting poles to the lengths and 
diameters illustrated. 

® Shovels (one for each two workers). 

® Pick (if the ground is hard). 

© Rainproof roof materials (very impor- 
tant in rainy, cold weather). At least 2 square 
yards of such material per person would be 
required; 3 square yards per person would be 
better. Shower curtains, plastic tablecloths, 
plastic mattress covers, canvas, and the like 
can be used. Also needed are 2 pieces of 
plastic or tightly woven cloth, each about 
6/2X6/2 ft, to make canopies over the two 
shelter openings. 

® Materials and tools for building a simple 
shelter-ventilating pump, a KAP 22 in. wide 
and 36 in. long. (See Appendix B.) Only in 
cold or continuously breezy, cool weather 

133 

134 

can tolerable temperatures and humidities be 
maintained for days in a crowded under- 
ground shelter that lacks an air pump. 

■• Containers for storing adequate water. 
(See Chapter 8.) 

B. Useful Materials and Tools 

© Large cans, buckets, and/or pots with 
bail handles—in which to carry earth and 
later to store drinking water and human 
wastes. 

© Two bedsheets and two pillowcases per 
person for covering cracks between roofing 
logs, making "sandbags," and improvising 
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs. 

• A file. 

• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler. 

• Rope, or strong wire (100 ft)—to make 
earth-retaining pole walls close to the shelter 
openings (as explained in step 19) and for 
hammock supports, etc. 

e Chain saw, pick-mattock, hammer, 
hatchet, pliers. 

• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil—to keep 
hand saws from sticking in gummy wood. 

• Expedient life-support items recom- 
mended in this book. 

• Mosquito netting or window screen to 
cover the openings, if mosquitoes or flies are 
likely to be a problem. 

4. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL 

TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 

5. Wear gloves from the start—even tough hands 
can blister after hours of chopping and digging, 
and become painful and infected. 

6. If possible, select a location for the shelter that is 
in the open and at least 50 ft from a building or 
woods. Remember that on a clear day the 
thermal pulse (flash of heat rays) from a very 
large nuclear explosion may cause fires as far 
away as 25 miles. 

7. If the site chosen is on a steep slope, locate the 
shelter with its length crosswise to the direction 
of the slope. 

8. Stake out the outlines of the trench, driving 
stakes as indicated in Fig. A.2.1 at the end of 
Appendix A.2. If more than 4 persons are to be 
sheltered, increase the length of the shelter room 
by 2 ft 9 in. for each additional person. 

9. Clear the ground of saplings and tall grass within 
10 ft of the staked outlines so that later the 
excavated eai th can be easily shoveled back onto 
the completed shelter roof. 

10. Start digging, throwing the first earth about 10 ft 
beyond the staked outlines of the trench. Less 
able members of the family should do the easier 
digging, near the surface. Those members who 
can use an ax and saw should cut and haul poles. 
See the introductory section of this appendix for 
the know-how to make this hard work easier. 

11. Pile all excavated earth at least 2 ft beyond the 
edges of the trench, so roofing poles can be laid 
directly on the ground. To make sure that the 
trenches are dug to the specified full widths at the 
bottoms, cut and use two sticks—one 42 in. long 
and the other 22 in. long—to check trench widths 
repeatedly. 

12. At the far end of the shelter dig the ventilation 
trench-emergency exit, making it 22 in. wide and 
40 in. deep. This will help provide essential 
ventilation and cooling. In cold weather or when 
fallout is descending, canvas or plastic curtains 
should be hung in the two openings to control the 
air flow. 

13. 

14. 

Make and install threshold boards, to keep the 
edges of earth steps and earth ledges from being 
broken off. (In damp earth, it is best to install 
threshold boards before roofing the shelter.) If 
boards are lacking, use small poles. 

Unless the weather is cold, build a shelter- 
ventilating pump—a KAP 20 in. wide X 36 in. 
high. (If the weather is cold, building a KAP can 
be safely delayed until aftei the shelter is 
completed.) A KAP should be made before a 
crisis, or, if possible, before leaving home. 

15. 

Obtain fresh-cut green poles, or, as a second 
choice, sound, dry, untreated poles. Use no poles 
smaller in diameter than those specified in the 
accompanying drawings. For ease in hauling, 
select poles no more than 50% larger in diameter 
than those specified. 

16. Lay the poles side by side over the trench. 
Alternate the large and small ends to keep the 
poles straight across the trench. If roof poles 9 ft 
long are being used to roof a 5-ft-wide trench, be 
sure to place the roof poles so that their ends 
extend 2 ft farther beyond one side of the trench 
than beyond the other side. This will enable 
shelter occupants, after the stoop-in shelter is 
completed, to widen the shelter room 2 ft on one 
side. First, it can be widened to provide a 2-ft- 
wide sleeping ledge. Later, it can be further 
deepened to make space for additional expedient 
hammocks or for double-bunk beds of poles or 
boards built on each side of the shelter. 

17. For ease and safety later when hanging expedient 
bedsheet-hammocks and bedsheet-chairs in the 
completed shelter, place loose loops around roof 
poles in the approximate locations given by the 
diagram on the second shelter drawing, Fig. 
A.2.2. Make these loose loops of rope, or strong 
wire, or 16-in-wide strips of strong cloth, such as 
50% polyester bedsheet rolled up to form a 
"rope". (For making hammocks and seats, see 
Chapter 14. These are not essential, although 
decidedly useful.) 

18. Cover the cracks between the logs with cloth, 
leaves, clay, or any other material that will keep 
dirt from falling down between the cracks. 
CAUTION: DO NOT try to rainproof this flat 
roof, and then simply cover it with earth. Water 
will seep through the loose earth cover, puddle 
on the flat roofing material, and leak through the 
joints between pieces of roofing material or 
through small holes. 

19. Place 6-ft-long poles, one on top of the other, 
next to the entrances. This will keep earth to be 
placed on top of the entry way trenches from 
falling into the openings. Secure these poles with 
wire or rope. (See View A-A1 in Fig. A.2.1.) If 
wire or rope is not available, make earth-filled 
"rolls" to hold the earth nearly vertical on the 
trench roof next to each opening. (See the 
introductory section of this appendix.) 

20. Mound earth to a center depth of about 18 in. 
over the shelter roof (as shown in View B-B' in 
Fig. A.2.1) to form the surface of the future 
"buried roof." Be sure to slope both sides of the 
mound. Then smooth its surface and remove 
sharp roots and stones that might puncture thin 
rainproofing materials to be placed upon it. 

135 

21. Place the waterproofing material on the "buried 
roof." If small pieces must be used, lay them in 
shingle-like fashion, starting at the lower sides of 
the mounded earth. 

22. Cover the buried roof with another 18 in. of 
mounded earth, and smooth this final earth 
surface. 

23. Finish the entrances by placing some shorter 
poles between the two longer poles next to each 
entryway. Bank and pack earth at least 6 in. deep 
around the sides of the entrances, so that 
rainwater on the ground cannot run into the 
shelter entrances. 

24. Dig surface drainage ditches around the outside 
of the mounded earth and around the entrances. 

25. Place a piece of water-shedding material over 
each of the entrances, forming an open-ended 
canopy to keep fallout and rain from the shelter 
openings. (See Fig. A in the introductory section 
of Appendix A.) Almost all fallout would settle 
on these suspended canopies, rather than falling 
into shelter openings—or would fall off their 
edges and onto the ground like sand. 

26. Hang the KAP from the roof of the trench 
opening into which outdoor air can be felt 
flowing, so that air will be pumped in the 
direction of the natural flow of air. 

27. Fill all available water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

28. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve your chances of surviving by doing as 
many of the following things as possible; 

(1) Make a homemade failcr meter, as de- 

scribed in Appendix C. 

(2) Make expedient lights. 

(3) Make and hang expedient bedsheet- 
hammocks and bedsheet-chairs, following 
the installation diagram shown in Fig. A.2.2. 

(4) Install screens of mosquito netting over the 
two openings, if mosquitoes or flies are a 

problem. Remember, however, that screen (5) Dig a stand-up hole near the far end of the 
or netting reduces the air flow through a shelter. Make the hole about 15 in. in 
shelter—even when the air is pumped diameter and deep enough to permit the 
through with a KAP. tallest of the shelter occupants to stand erect 

occasionally. 

137 

D 
2 

H 

in 
o 

» E 

I1 
r<8 

3* 

U 

CO 

u 
C 

•3 

2 u 
>■ o 
U 

o 

ab 

P 8"> 

Ui z 
m tu 
8f ■ 
8*> 

;z 
3, "I 

*.* 

[-81-] 

*5 M 

138 

4= 

JS u 
c 
u 

u > 
o 
U 

o 
Qu 

< 

E 

Appendix A.3 
Small-Pole Shelter 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

CAPACITY 

Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 1000 
(PF 1000), if the shelter is covered with at least 3 ft of 
earth. That is, a person in the open outside this shelter 
will receive a gamma ray dose 1000 times greater than 
he will receive inside the shelter. See drawings at the 
end of Appendix A.3. 

Against blast: This shelter is excellent for 
preventing fatalities if it is built with strong expedient 
blast doors; it is still quite good if built without them. 
(These instructions are for fallout shelters. The 
instructions for making blast doors and other 
essentials for adequate blast protection are given in 
Appendix D.) 

Against fire: Excellent, if sufficiently distant 
from fires that produce carbon monoxide and toxic 
smoke. 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

In wooded areas with small trees, for builders 
who have a saw (bow saw, crosscut, or chain saw) and 
digging tools. Any location is suitable if the necessary 
poles may be obtained there. 

For belowground, semiburied, or aboveground 
construction. (However, aboveground construction 
requires the excavation and movement of so much 
earth that it is not practical for 2-day construction by 
families with only hand tools.) 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For families or other groups with most members 
able to work hard 12 hours a day for 2 days. (Most 
people do not realize how hard and long they can 
work if given a strong incentive.) 

The drawings and lists of materials given in these 
instructions are for a 12-person shelter. For each 
additional occupant beyond 12, add 1 ft to the length- 
of the shelter room. 

This shelter requires less work and materials per 
occupant if its room is sized for about 24 persons, 
because the entrances are the same regardless of the 
length of the room. (To make the shelter room twice 
as long, each of the horizontal, ladder-like braces on 
the floor and near the ceiling of the room can be made 
with two poles on a side, rather than one long pole on 
aside.) 

If the room is sized for more than 24 people, 
management and hygiene problems become more 
difficult when it is occupied. 

For 12 people to live for many days in this shelter 
without serious hardship, the benches and bunks 
must be built with the dimensions and spacings given 
in the illustration. Or, materials must be available for 
making and suspending 12 expedient bedsheet- 
hammocks that can be converted each day into 12 
bedsheet-chairs. 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Study both of the two drawings (Fig. A.3.1 
and A.3.2 at the end of Append!;; A.3) and read 
al! of these instructions before beginning 
work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP WHEN 
COMPLETED. 

2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed (1) a ventilating pump (a KAP 24 in. 
wide and 36 in. high), essential except in cold 
weather, and (2) the storage of at least 15 gallons 
of water per occupant. 

139 

140 

3. Start to assemble the required materials. For 
building a 12-person Small-Pole Shelter, the 
materials are: 

® Green poles. No pole should have a 
small end of less diameter than the minimum 
diameter specified for its use by Figs. A.3.1 and 
A.3.2. The table below lists the number and sizes 
of poles needed to build a 12-person Small-Pole 
Shelter. 

Pole Length 

Minimum Diameter 
of Small End 

Number of 
Poles Required 

Width6 

• Materials to build a homemade ventilat- 
ing pump (a KAP 24 in. wide and 36 in. high—see 
Appendix B) and to store at least 15 gallons of 
water per occupant (see Chapter 8). 

4. Desirable muscle-powered tools for building a 
12-person, Small-Pole Shelter are listed below. 
(Most builders have succeeded without having 
this many tools. A backhoe, chain saws, and 
other mechanized equipment would be helpful, 
but not essential.) 

Tools Quantity 

6 fl 2 in. 
3 ft 1 in. 
2 ft 4 in." 
10 ft 8 in. 
8 ft 8 in. 
10 ft 6 in. 
7 ft 2 in. 
5 ft 6 in." 
6 ft 10 in. 
6 ft 3 in. 
2 ft 6 in." 
2 ft 3 in. 
5 ft 2 in. 
3 ft 10 in. 
10 ft' 

5 in. 
5 in. 
5 in. 
5 in. 
5 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
3'/: in. 
31;: in. 
2 in. 

2 
12 
12 
- 
- 
4 
- 
12 
- 
8 
16 
4 
- 
4 
12 

7 ft 

7 ft 

47 ft 

3 ft 

8 ft 

36 ft 

"To be shortened to fit for crossbraces. 
"Width equals the distance measured across a single layer of poles 
when a sufficient number of poles are laid on the ground side by side 
and touching, to cover a rectangular area. 
'For supports during construction. 

NOTE: The above list does not include flooring materials, to be 
placed between the poles of the ladder-like braces on the earth floor. 

• Rainproofing materials: Preferably one 
100-ft roll 12 ft wide, of 6-mil polyethylene. The 
minimum amount needed is 200 sq. ft. of 4-mil 
polyethylene, or 200 sq. ft of other waterproof 
plastic such as tablecloths, shower curtains, 
and/or vinyl floor covering. Also include 100 ft 
of sticks for use in drainage ditch drains (/2-in. 
diameter, any lengths). 

• Nails, wire, and/'or cord: Ten pounds of 
40-penny nails plus 4 pounds of 16-penny nails 
are ideal. However, 7 pounds of 16-penny nails 
can serve. 

» Boards for benches and overhead bunks, 
if bedsheet-hammocks are not to be used. 
(Boards are desirable, but not essential: small 
poles can be used instead.) 2 X 4-in. boards—70 
feet for frames (or use 3-in.-diameter poles). 1 X 
8-in. boards—100 feet (or use 1-to 2-in.-diameter 
poles). 

Ax, long-handle 2 
Bow-saw, 28-in. 2 
(or 2-man crosscut saw) 1 
Pick 2 
Shovel, long-handle 3 
Claw hammer 2 
File, 10-in. 1 
Steel tape, 10-ft 1 

(Also useful: a 50-ft steel tape and 2 hatchets) 

5. To help drain the floor, locate the shelter so that 
the original ground level at the entrance is about 
12 inches lower than the original ground level at 
the far end of the shelter—unless the location is 
in a very flat area. 

6. Stake out the trench for the entire shelter. Even 
in very firm ground, if the illustrated 12-person 
shelter is being built, make the excavation at the 
surface 9 ft 8 in. wide and 18 ft long (3 ft longer 
than the entire length of the wooden shelter). The 
sloping sides of the excavation are necessary, 
even in very firm earth, to provide adequate 
space for backfilling and tamping. (The trench 
illustrated in Fig. A.3.1 is 6 ft 4 in. deep, to 
minimize work when providing only for excellent 
fallout protection. For improved blast protec- 
tion, the trench should be at least 7 ft deep.) 

7. Check the squareness of the staked trench outline 

by making its diagonals equal. 

8. Clear all brush, tall grass, and the like from the 
ground, to a distance of 10 ft all around the 
staked location—so that later you can easily 
shovel loose earth back onto the roof. 

9. If the ground is unstable, excavate with sides that 

are appropriately less steep. 

10. When digging the trench for the shelter, use a 
measuring stick 7 ft 8 in. long (the minimum 

bottom width) to repeatedly check the excava- 
tion width. 

11. When digging with a shovel, pile the earth dug 
from near ground level about 10 ft away from the 
edges of the excavation. Earth dug from 5 or 6 ft 
below ground level then can easily be piled on the 
surface only 1 to 5 ft from the edge of the 
excavation. 

12. Finish the bottom of the excavation so that it 
slopes vertically V2 in. per foot of length toward 
the entrance, and also slopes toward the central 
drain ditch. (Later, sticks covered with porous 
fabric should be placed in the ditches, to serve 
like a crushed-rock drain leading to a sump.) 

13. While some persons are excavating, others 
should be cutting green poles and hauling them 
to the site. Cut poles that have tops no smaller 
than the specified diameters for each type of pole 
(not including the bark). 

14. For ease in handling poles, select wall and roof 
poles with top diameters no more than 50% 
larger than the specified minimum diameters. 

15. Sort the poles by size and lay all poles of the same 

size together, near the excavation. 

16. Before the excavation is completed, start 
building the ladder-like, horizontal braces of the 
shelter frame. Construct these braces on smooth 
ground near the excavation. Place two straight 
poles, each 10 ft 6 in. long (with small-end 
diameters of 4 in.), on smooth ground, parallel 
and 6 ft 2 in. apart. Hold these poles securely so 
that their outer sides are exactly 6 ft 2 in. apart, 
by driving two pairs of stakes into the ground so 
that they just touch the outsides of the two long 
poles. Each of the four stakes should be located 
about one foot from the end of a pole. To keep 
the 10 ft 6 in. poles from being rotated duringthe 
next step, nail two boards or small poles across 
them perpendicularly as temporary braces, 
about 4 ft apart. 

Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten the 
inner sides of the two poles at the spots where the 
ends of the 6 cross-brace poles will be nailed. 
Next, saw each cross-brace pole to the length 
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally, 
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably 
with two 40-penny nails in each end. 

17. Place the lower, ladder-like horizontal brace of 
the main room on the floor of the completed 
excavation. 

141 

18. Build the frame of the main room. Near the four 
corners of the room, secure four of its wall poles 
in their final vertical positions by nailing, wiring, 
or tying temporary brace-poles to the inner sides 
of these 4 wall poles and to the inner sides of the 
two long poles of the ladder-like horizontal brace 
on the bottom of the excavation. To keep the two 
pairs of vertical wall poles exactly 6 ft 2 in. apart 
until the upper ladder-like horizontal brace is 
secured in its place, nail a temporary horizontal 
brace across each pair of vertical poles, about 1 ft 
below their tops. 

19. To support the upper ladder-like horizontal 
brace, nail blocks to the inner sides' of the four 
vertical wall poles, as shown in the lower right- 
hand corner of the pictorial view, Fig. A.3.2. If 
you have large nails, use a block about 3 in. thick 
and 6 in. long, preferably cut from a green, 4-in.- 
diameter pole. 

20. In the finished shelter, DO NOT leave any 
vertical support poles under the long poles of the 
upper ladder-like horizontal brace; to do so 
would seriously reduce the usable space along the 
walls for benches, bunks, and occupants. 

21. While some workers are building the frame of the 
main room, other workers should make the four 
ladder-like horizontal braces for the two en- 
trances, then make the complete entrances. To 
keep the ladder-like horizontal braces square 
during construction and back-filling, nail a 
temporary diagonal brace across each one. 

22. When the four wall poles and the two ladder-like 
horizontal braces of the main room are in place, 
put the remaining vertical wall poles in place, 
touching each other, until all walls are com- 
pleted. When placing the wall poles, keep them 
vertical by alternately putting a butt and a top 
end uppermost. Wall poles can be held in 
position by backfilling and tamping about a foot 
of earth against their lower ends, or they can be 
wired in position until backfilled. 

23. Be sure to use the two 5-in.-diameter poles (6 ft 2 
in. long) by placing one next to the top and the 
other next to the bottom of each of the main 
doorways to the room. Study the drawings. Use 
braces, each 2 ft. 3 in. long, to hold apart the top 
and bottom of each doorway—thus making sure 
that a 24-in.-wide air pump can swing in either 
doorway. 

24. To prevent earth from coming through the 
cracks between wall poles, cover the walls with 

142 

cloth, plastic, rugs, roofing, or even cardboard. If 
none of these are available, use sticks, twigs, or 
grass to cover the wider cracks. 

25. After all horizontal bracing and vertical wall 
poles are in place, begin backfilling, putting earth 
between the walls and trench sides. Pay particu- 
lar attention to the order of filling. The earth fill 
behind all the walls must be brought up quite 
evenly, so that the earth fill behind one side is no 
more than 12 in. higher at any one time than the 
earth on the opposite side. Lightly tamp the earth 
fill in 6-in. layers. A pole makes a good tamper; 
do not use a mechanical tamper. 

26. Next, lay the roof poles side by side, touching 
each other on top ofthe wall poles. Cover at least 
the larger cracks with plastic, roofing, boards, or 
sticks to keep earth from falling through. If the 
earth is sandy, cover the whole roof with some 
material such as bedsheets or plastic to keep 
sand from running through the cracks. 

CAUTION: Do not try to rainproof this flat roof 
and simply cover it with earth. If you do, water 
will seep straight through the loose earth cover, 
puddle on the flat roofing material, and leak 
through the joints between pieces of roofing 
material or through small holes. 

27. Mound earth over the shelter, piling it about 15 
in. deep along the centerline of the roof and 
sloping it toward the sides of the roof, so that the 
earth is only about 2 in. deep over the ends ofthe 
roof poles. (Preparatory to mounding earth onto 
the roof, place gradestakes in position so you will 
be able to know the locations and depths of roof 
poles as you cover them.) Continue these slopes 
to two side drainage ditches. Smooth this 
mounded earth with a rake or stick and remove 
any sticks or rocks likely to puncture the 
rainproof roofing material to be laid on it. 

28. Place rainproofing material on top of the 
smooth, mounded earth—as shown in sections of 
the drawings in Fig. A.3.1—to make a "buried 
roof." Plastic film, such as4-mil polyethylene, is 
preferable. Roofing material, plastic shower 
curtains and tablecloths, or canvas can also be 
used. Be sure to overlap adjoining pieces. 

29. Place the rest of the earth cover over the shelter, 
being sure that the corners of the shelter have at 
least 2!/: ft of earth over thern. Mound the dirt, 
smoothing its surface so that water will tend to 
run off to the surface drainage ditches which 

should be dug all around the edges of the 
mounded earth. 

30. Build the benches and overhead bunks. If boards 
are available, use them; if not, use small, straight 
poles. On each side, build a row of benches and 
bunks 9 ft long, centered in the shelter. In order 
to use the shelter space to the greatest advantage, 
make the heights and widths of the benches and 
bunks the same as the thoroughly tested heights 
(14 in. and 4 ft 5 in.) and widths (16 in. and 24 in.) 
given by Fig. A.3.2. Also be sure to space their 
vertical supports 3 ft apart—so two adults can sit 
between each pair of vertical bunk supports. 

31. Narrow the ends of the overhead bunks so that 
the aisle between them is about 28 in. wide for a 
distance of 38 in. from each doorway. This allows 
room for installation and operation of an 
expedient air pump (a KAP) for prevention of 
dangerous overheating in warm weather. 

32. Place a canopy (open on all sides) over each 
entrance, to minimize the entry of sand-like 
fallout particles or rain. 

33. To improve the floor, lay small poles between the 
lower brace poles, so that the floor is approxi- 
mately level. Or, use sticks covered with scrap 
boards. 

34. Fill all available water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

35. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve your chances of surviving by doing as 
many of the following things as possible; 

(1) Make a homemade fallout meter, as de- 

scribed in Appendix C. 

(2) Make expedient lights. 

(3) Make and hang expedient bedsheet- 

hammocks and bedsheet-chairs. 

EXPEDIENT VENTILATION AND COOLING 

(Those workers who are to work only on the 
shelter itself, if pushed for time, need not read this 
section before beginning their work.) 

143 

Install a KAP (one that is 24 in. wide and 36 in. 
high) near the top of the doorway through which you 
can feel air naturally flowing into the shelter room at 
that time. (If the direction of the natural air flow 
changes, move the KAP to the other opening.) To 
enable the KAP to efficiently pump fresh air from the 
outdoors all the way through the shelter, block the 
lower half of the doorway in which the KAP is 
installed with a quickly removable covering, such as a 
plastic-covered frame made of sticks. Be sure to 
connect the KAP's pullcord only 11 in. below its 
hinge line. This prevents excessive arm motions 
which would cause unnecessary fatigue. 

In windy or cold weather, control the natural 
flow of air through the shelter by hanging adjustable 
curtains in the doorways at both ends, and or by 
making and using trapdoors on the tops of the 
vertical entryways. For adjustable curtains, use 
pieces of plastic, each with a supporting stick 
attached to its upper edge. This allows for different- 
sized openings in the doorways: (1) an opening under 
the lower edge of the adjustable curtain at the air- 
intake end of the room, and (2) an opening over the 
top of the curtain at the air-exhaust end of the room. 
In cold weather, this arrangement usually will 
provide adequate chimney-type ventUation for the 
shelter without using an air pump. 

144 

1! 
JS 
CO 
_u 
~"o 

r 

',"3 
E 
Vi 

eg 

e 
o 
> 
E 
•o s 
ea 
e 
ea 

< 
- e» 
E 

145 

u 

"3 
cu i 
H 
e 
V3 

S 
** 

O 

'£ 
<*i 
< 
an 

- uz 
o •» « 

gexsO 

SS5s 

Appendix A.4 
Aboveground, Door-Covered Shelter . 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 
about 200 (PF 200) if covered with 30 in. of earth. (A 
person in the open outside this shelter would receive 
about 200 times more fallout radiation than if he were 
inside.) The drawing at the end of Appendix A.4 
shows the earth cover only 20 in. thick, resulting in a 
PF of about 100. 

Against blast: Better protection than most 
homes. Blast tests have indicated that this shelter 
would be undamaged at least up to the 5-psi 
overpressure range from large explosions. Without 
blast doors the shelter's occupants could be injured at 
this overpressure range, although probably not 
fatally. 

Against fire: Fair, if the cloth in the entries is 
covered with mud and if the shelter'is sufficiently 
distant from fires producing carbon monpxide and 
toxic smoke. \ 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

In locations where holes 14 inches deep can be 
dug quite easily, but the water table or rock is too 
close to the surface for a covered-trench shelter to be 
feasible. 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For a family or other group with two or more 
members able to work hard for most of 36 hours. 
Very little building skill is needed. 

CAPACITY 

The shelter illustrated in Fig. A.4 is the 
minimum length for 4 persons. It is roofed with 6 
doors. 

For each additional person, add another door. 
(If more than about 7 persons are to be sheltered, 
build 2 or more separate shelters.) 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Before beginning work, study the drawing and 
read ALL of the following instructions. Divide the 
work so that some will be digging while others are 
building an air pump, storing water, etc. CHECK 
OFF EACH STEP WHEN COMPLETED. 

2. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed a ventilating pump (a 16-in.-wide by 24- 
in.-high KAP—essential except in cold weather) and 
the storage of 15 gallons of water per occupant. (See 
Appendix B and Chapter 8.) 

3. Start to assemble the materials and tools needed. 
For the illustrated 4-person shelter, these are: 

A. Essential Materials and Tools 

9 Six doors. Boards or plywood at least 5/8- 
in. thick can be used to replace one or more of 
the doors. 

© At least 4 double-bed sheets for each of 
the first four persons, and 3 double-bed 
sheets for each additional person to be 
sheltered—or enough pieces cf fabric and/or 
of plastic to cover at least as large an. area as 
the sheets would cover. (Thb <iiav.erial is for 
making aboveground shelter walls, to serve 
as sand bags.) 

• Rainproofing materials (plastic film, 
shower curtains, plastic tablecloths, mattress 
protectors, etc.)—15 square yards for the first 
4 persons and 2V2 square yards for each 
additional person. 

147 

148 

® A shovel (one shovel for each two 
workers is desirable). A pick or mattock if the 
ground is very hard. 

additional door for each of the two entries. Be 
sure the door knobs have been removed. Use the 
two widest doors to roof the entries. 

® A knife (the only essential tool for 
making a small shelter-ventilating KAP) and 
materials for a KAP 16 in. wide and 24 in. 
high. (See Appendix B.) 
* Containers for storing water. (See 
Chapter 8.) 

B. Useful Materials and Tools 

"® Two or more buckets, large cans and / or 
large pots with bail handles—to carry earth, 
and later to store water or wastes. 

• Saw (or ax or hatchet)—to cut a few 
boards or small poles. 

• Hammer and at least 15 small nails (at 
least 2V2 in. long). 

© Tape measure, yardstick, or ruler. 

® Additional cloth and/or plastic—equiv- 
alent in size to 2 more double-bed sheets for 
each person. 

® Additional waterproof material—2 
more square yards per person. 

• Pillowcases, or cloth or plastic bags—to 
serve as earth-filled sand bags. The more, the 
better. 

4. To save time and work, sharpen all tools and 

keep them sharp. 

5. Wear gloves from the start, to help prevent 

blisters and infections. 

6. Select a building site where there is little or no 
chance of the ground being covered with water, 
and where the water table (groundwater level) is 
not likely to rise closer than 18 inches to the 
surface. 

7. To avoid the extra work of digging among roots, 

select a site away from trees, if practical. 

8. To lessen the dangers of fire and smoke from 
nearby nouses or trees that might catch fire, 
locate your shelter as far as is practical from 
houses and flammable vegetation. 

9. Before staking out your shelter, provide one door 
per person to roof the main room plus one 

10. To be sure that all the walls will be in the proper 
positions to be roofed with the available doors, 
lay all the doors on the ground, touching each 
other and in the same relative positions they will 
have when used to roof the shelter. When all the 
roof doors are on the ground, side by side, 
determine the exact length of the shelter room. 
(Note that Fig. A.4 illustrates a shelter sized for 
only 4 persons.) 

11. Stake out the shelter. 

12. Make the earth-filled "rolls" that will form the 
aboveground walls of your shelter. To make 
walls out of the rolls: 

(1) Use doors as vertical forms to hold the 
earth-filled rolls in place until the walls are 
completed. (These are the same doors that 
you will use later to roof the shelter.) 

(2) Brace the door-forms with 36-in.-long 
braces (boards or sticks) that press against 
the doors, as shown in Fig. A.4. Nail only 
the upper braces, using only very small 
nails. 

(3) After the forms for the two inner sides of the 
shelter have been finished, put parts of the 
long sides of bedsheets on the ground, as 
illustrated. (Or use other equally wide, 
strong cloth or plastic material.) About a 2- 
ft width of cloth should be on the ground, 
and the rest of each sheet should be folded 
up out of the way, over the outsides of the 
door-forms. Adjacent sheets should overlap 
about I ft when making a roll than is longer 
than one sheet. 

(4) Shovel earth onto the parts of the sheet on 
the ground to the height of the rolls you are 
making, as shown. Note that the roll to be 
made on one side is 2in.h<gherthantheroll 
on the other side. 

(5) Shape the surface of the shoveled-on earth 
as illustrated, to hold the "hooks" of cloth 
to be formed when the exposed sides of the 
sheets are folded down. 

(6) Fold down the upper side of each sheet 
while pulling on it to keep it tight and 
without wrinkles. It should lie on the 

prepared earth surface, including the small 
narrow trench, as illustrated in the first 
section of this appendix. 

(7) Pack, earth onto the part of the folded-down 
sheet that is in the narrow, shallow trench. 
Then, as shown in the sketches at the 
bottom of the accompanying drawing, fold 
back the loose edge over this small amount 
of packed earth to form a "hook." (The 
hook keeps the weight of the earth inside a 
roll from pulling the cloth out of its proper 
position.) 

(8) Make a roll first on one side of the shelter, 
then on the other, to keep the heights of the 
earth on both sides of the shelter about 
equal. This will keep the unequal heights of 
earth from pushing the door-forms out of 
their vertical positions. 

(9) Add additional earth on top of the rolls so 
that the height of the level earth surface, out 
to the full width of a roll, is the same as the 
height of the cloth-covered part of the roll 
that is against the door-form. 

(10) When the roll walls have been raised to their 
planned heights on both sides of the shelter, 
remove the braces and the door- 
forms—being careful to keep the brace nails 
from damaging the doors. 

(11) The door-forms of the side-walls of the 
shelter can be removed before building the 
end-walls. 

13. When smoothing the earth surfaces of the final 
tops of the roll walls on both sides, check to see 
that they have the same slope as the lower sides of 
the roof doors will have after they are placed on 
the roll walls. (A slope is necessary so that 
rainwater reaching the waterproof covering to be 
placed over the doors will run off the lower side.) 
Study Fig. A.4. 

14. After the side-walls have been completed (except 
for their ends that form the sides of an entry) and 
after the door-forms have been removed, use the 
same doors for forms to build the two 22-in.-wide 
entries. 

15. Use earth-filled "sand bags" (made of pillowcases 
or sacks, and/or the tucked-in ends of earth- 
filled rolls) to make the outer ends of each 
entry way. 

149 

16. Make the two doorway frames if lumber, nails, 
and a saw are available. Make each frame as high 
as the wall on each side of it, and slope the top 
board of each frame so that it will press flat 
against the doorto be supported. (If materials for 
a frame are lacking, place a single 2 by 4-in. 
board—or a pole about 6 ft. long—across the top 
of the entry, in the position shown in Fig. A.4 for 
the top of the doorway frame.) 

17. After carefully removing all the temporary 
braces from the door-forms and the doors 
themselves, improve the slopes of the tops of all 
supporting walls so that the doors will be 
supported evenly and, without being twisted, will 
make contact with the smooth, sloping earth or 
cloth upon which they will rest. 

18. If more than enough waterproof plastic or 
similar material is available to cover all the roof 
doors, also cover the tops of the walls on which 
the roof doors will rest. This will keep the doors 
from absorbing water from damp earth. 

19. Dig the illustrated 14-in.-deep, 36-in.-wide 
trench inside the shelter. (If the water table is too 
high to dig down 14 in., in some locations the 
walls can be raised to a height of 38 in. by cutting 
turf sods and laying them on top of the walls. 
Another way the wall height can be increased is 
by making additional rolls.) 

20. Place the roof doors in their final positions, and 
cover them with waterproof material (if avail- 
able). Be sure the waterproof material is folded 
under the higher edges of the doors—to keep the 
material from slipping downward on the sloping 
doors as earth is shoveled onto the roof. 

21. Extend the waterproof material on top of the 
doors a couple of feet beyond the lower ends of 
the doors—if enough material is available to 
cover all of the roof doors. 

22. When shoyeling the first layer of earth onto the 
rainproof material protecting the doors, avoid 
hitting and possibly puncturing *.?. with rocks or 
sharp pointed roots in the earth. 

23. To make earth arching more effective in 
supporting most of the earth to be placed on the 
roof doors, first mound earth on and near the 
ends of the doors. 

24. Cover the roof with at least 20 in. of earth. Make 
sure that there also is a thickness of at least 20 in. 
of earth at the corners of both the room and 
entries. 

150 

25. To prevent surface water from running into the 
shelter if it rains hard, mound packed earth 
about 5 in. high just inside the two entries. Rain 
can be kept out by a small canopy or awning that 
extends 2 or 3 ft in front of the outermost edge of 
a doorway that roofs an entry. 

26. If any waterproof material remains, use it to 

cover the floor of the shelter. 

27. If the weather is warm or hot, install a 16-in.- 
wide by 24-in.-high air pump (a KAP). Attach its 
hinges to the board across the roof of the entry 
into which outside air is moving naturally at the 
time. 

28. Cover all exposed combustible material with 
mud, earth, or other fireproof material, to reduce 
the chance of exposed cloth being ignited from a 
nuclear explosion or heatlfrom a nearby fire. 

29. Fill all available water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

30. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve ycur chances of surviving by doing as 
many of the following things as possible; 

(1) Make a homemade fallout meter, as de- 

scribed in Appendix C. 

(2) Make expedient lights. 

c 
n 
to 
4 

< ■- 

9<{T 

151 

u 
J3 

•a 
u 
L. 
Ü > 
o 
U 
i 
o 
o 
Q 
■o" s 
3 
O 
Ui 
BO 

U > 
o 
< 

< 
so 
ÜU 

Appendix A.5 
Aboveground, Ridgepole Shelter 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

CAPACITY 

Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 300 
(PF 300) if covered with 24 in. of earth. (A person in 
the open outside this shelter would receive about 300 
times more fallout radiation than if he were inside.) 
See the accompanying drawing at the end of 
Appendix A.5. 

Against blast: Better protection than most 
homes. Blast tests have indicated that this shelter 
would be undamaged at least up to the 5-psi 
overpressure range from large explosions. Without 
blast doors, the shelter's occupants could be injured 
at this overpressure range, although probably not 
fatally. 

Against fire: Good, if the shelter is sufficiently 
distant from fires producing carbon monoxide and 
toxic smoke. 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

In many wooded areas and wherever enough 

poles are available. 

In locations where belovground expedient 
shelters are impractical because the water table or 
rock, is too close to the surface for a covered-trench 
shelter. 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For a family or group with 5 or more members 
able to work hard for most of 48 hours, at least one of 
whom is able to saw and lit poles and use the hand 
tools listed on the following page. 

The shelter illustrated in Fig. A.5 is the 
minimum length for 5 persons. For each additional 
person, add 1 ft to the length of the ridgepole and 
shelter room. (If more than about 15 persons are to be 
sheltered, build 2 or more separate shelters.) 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Before beginning work, study Fig. A.5 and read 

ALL of the following instructions. 

2. Divide the work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP 

WHEN COMPLETED. 

3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed a ventilating pump (a KAP 20 in. wide 
and 26 in high, essential for this shelter except in 
cool weather) and the storage of at least 15 
gallons of water per occupant. (See Appendix B 
and Chapter 8.) 

4. Start to assemble the materials. For the illus- 

trated 5-person shelter, these are: 

A. Essential Materials and Tool:* 

9 Poles. (Fresh-cut, green poles are best; 
sound, untreated poles are satisfactory.) See 
the following list for the number of poles 
required for a 5-person shelter. 

Preceding page Wank 

153 

154 

Use 

Pole Length 

Minimum 
Diameter of 
Small End 

Number 
of Poles 
Required 

Width When All 
Are Laid on 
the Ground 

For main room: 

Ridgepole 
Column-posts 
Footing log 
Cross braces 
Roof poles 
Vertical end-wall poles 
Slanting end-w?.ll poles 

and extras 

For outer sections of entryways: 

Horizontal poles 
Cross braces (material for 16) 
Wall poles 
Roof poles 

For inner sections of entryways: 

Long, sloping poles 
Cross braces 
Vertical support poles 
Roof poles 

4 ft 9 in. 
4 ft 3 in. 
8 ftO in. 
6 ft 2 in. 
9 ftO in. 
5 f t 0 in.' 
6 ft 6 in.' 

8 ft 0 in. 
5 ft 0 in.' 
3 ft 4 in. 
2 ft 8 in. 

14 ftO in. 
1 ft 8 in.' 
4 ft 0 in.' 
3 ft 0 in. 

6 in. 
5 in. 
6 in. 
3 in. 
4 in. 
3' ;• in. 
3';: in. 

3'/: in. 
31/: in. 
3 in. 
21/: in. 

4 in. 
4 in. 
4 in. 
2'.': in. 

1 
2 
1 
2 
- 
- 
- 

4 
6 
- 
— 

4 
8 
8 
— 

5 ft" 
14 ft" 
18 ft'' 

32 ft" 
12 ft" 

13 ft'" 

"This width equals the distance measured across the tops of a single layer of poles when a sufficient number of poles are laid on 
the ground side by side 117//7 all the same ends in a straight line and touching. (These poles will be placed butt-ends down to form 
the walls of the shelter room.) 

"This width equals the distance measured across a single layer of poles when a sufficient number of poles are laid on the 

ground side by side and touching, with large ends and small ends alternating so as to cover a rectangular area. 

'To be cut into the various lengths needed to close the ends of the main room and also to close a part of each entryway. 

• A saw and an ax or hatchet, to cut green 
poles. (A bow saw or crosscut saw serves well 
and often is more dependable than a chain 
saw. Having an extra blade for a bow saw 
may be essential.) 

■© Two shovels (one shovel for each two 
workers is desirable). A pick will also be 
needed, if the earth is hard. 

® Large buckets, cans, or pots with bail 
handles—in which to carry earth, and later to 
store water or wastes. 

« A knife. 

® A hammer and at least 80 nails (3 in. or 
longer). If these are not at hand, rope, wire, 
or strips of cloth can be used to lash poles 
together. At least 200 ft. of rope or strong 
wire will be needed, or two additional 
bedsheets for each person to be sheltered. 
(Other fabric of equal strength can be used.) 
The cloth can be cut or torn into foot-wide 
strips and twisted slightly to make "rope." 

• Three double-bed sheets for the illus- 
trated 5-person shelter or a piece of strong 
fabric or plastic of about the same size. One 
additional sheet for each additional 2 
occupants. (If sufficient sheets or other 
material are not available, use many sticks 
and small poles, placed across the 9-ft side 
poles.) 

• At least 2 square yards per person of 
rainproofing material (shower curtains, 
plastic tablecloths, plastic mattress covers, or 
the like)—essential in rainy, cold weather. 

• Materials for building a ventilating 
pump, a KAP 20 in. wide and 26 in. high. 
(See Appendix B.) 

© Containers for storing 15 gallons of 
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.) 

B. Useful Tools and Materials 

® Additional saws, axes, hatchets, shovels, 
and large buckets or cans. 

® A chain saw—if there is a person in the 
group who is skilled at operating one. 

• Kerosene, turpentine, or oil—to keep a 
handsaw from sticking in green, gummy 
wood. 

9 A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler. 

® One bedsheet for each person to be 
sheltered, or a piece of strong fabric or plastic 
of about the same size. 

® A total of 40 square yards of rainproof- 
ing materials for the illustrated 5-person 
shelter and 3'/2 square yards for each 
additional person. (Even thin plastic will 
serve for the "buried roof.") 

5. To save time and work, SHARPEN 
TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 

ALL 

6. Wear gloves from the start—even tough hands 
can blister after hours of digging and chopping 
and can become painful and infected. 

7. Select a shelter location where there is little 
chance of the ground being covered with water if 
it rains hard. (If you are sure the water table will 
not rise to cover the floor of a shallow 
excavation, you can save work by first lowering 
the area of the planned main room by a foot or 
two. After the shelter is roofed, the excavated 
earth can be shoveled back to help cover the 
completed pole roof.) To avoid the extra work of 
cutting roots when excavating earth, select a site 
at least as far away from a tree as the tree is tall. 

8. For a shelter that is completely aboveground, 
clear grass, weeds, etc. from the area where the 
shelter is to be built. (This reduces the possible 
problem of chiggers, ticks, etc.) Do not remove 
any earth at this stage. 

9. Stake out the entire shelter. Check the square- 
ness of the shelter room by making its diagonals 
equal. Then drive two lines of stakes to mark the 
outside edges of the completed earth covering. 
Place these stakes 4 ft outside the future positions 
of the lower ends of the roof poles. 

10. Check the squareness of the future floor area 
inside the two lines marking where the 
two V-shaped, 4-in.-deep trenches will be dug, 
to secure the lower ends of the sloping side-poles 
of the room. These two parallel lines are 14 ft. 6 
in. apart. When the two diagonals joining the 

155 

ends of these two parallel lines are equal in 
length, the area between them has square 
corners. 

11. While some persons are staking out the shelters, 
others should be cutting green poles and hauling 
them to the site. Cut poles that have tops with 
diameters (excluding bark) no smaller than the 
diameters specified on the illustration for each 
type of pole. 

12. To make the hauling and handling of the longer 
poles easier, select poles with top diameters no 
more than 50% larger than the specified 
minimum diameters. 

13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay all 
poles of each size together, near the excavation. 

14. AS SOON AS POLES ARE BROUGHT TO 
THE SITE, SOME WORKERS SHOULD 
START BUILDING THE FOUR LADDER- 
LIKE HORIZONTAL BRACES FOR THE 
ENTRYWAYS—TO AVOID DELAYS LAT- 
ER. Study the drawing. Then construct these 
braces on smooth ground near the excavation. 
Place two straight poles, each 8 ft long (with 
small-end diameters of 3% in.), on smooth 
ground, parallel and so that their outer sides are 3 
ft apart. Hold these poles securely so that their 
outer sides are exactly 3 ft apart, by driving two 
pairs of stakes into the ground so that they just 
touch the outsides of the two long poles. Each of 
the four stakes should be located about one foot 
from the end of a pole. To keep the 8-ft poles 
from being rotated during the next step, nail two 
boards or small poles across them perpen- 
dicularly, as temporary braces, about 4 ft apart. 

Then with an ax or hatchet, slightly flatten 
the inner sides of the two poles at the spots where 
the ends of the 4 cross-brace poles will be nailed. 
Next, saw each cross-brace pole tc the length 
required to fit snugly into its place. Finally, 
toenail each cross-brace pole in place, preferably 
with two large nails in each end. 

15. If more than 5 persons are to be sheltered, use 3 
column-posts for 6 to 9 persons, and 4 column- 
posts for 10 to 14 persons. 

16. For each additional person beyond 5, make the 
ridgepole and the footing log each 1 foot longer 
than shown in Fig. A.5. 

156 

17. After notching the footing log (see drawing), 
place it in a trench dug deep enough so that the 
bottoms of its notches are about 4 inches below 
the surface of the ground. 

18. Carefully dig the 4-in.-deep, V-shaped, straight 
trenches in which the lower ends of the 9-ft wall 
poles will rest. Dig each of these two parallel 
trenches 7 ft 3 in. from the center line of the 
footing log. 

19. Carefully notch a "V" only about '/j-in. deep in 
the top of each of the two outer coiumn-posts. 
Then saw off the other ends so that each is 4 ft 
3 in. long. (When they are placed on the notched 
footing log and the ridgepole is placed on them, 
the upper side of the ridgepole will be about 4 ft 
4 in. above the ground.) 

20. Place the two outer column-posts in their 
notches in the footing log, and secure the base of 
each column-post against sideways movement by 
placing two small-diameter, 4-ft horizontal poles 
just below the ground level on both sides, as 
illustrated. Then temporarily placeand bracethe 
ridgepole in position. 

21. For shelters sized for more than 5 occupants, 
make and place the inner column-post, or posts. 
To avoid cutting a "V"-notched column-post too 
short, first carefully "V"-notch each remaining 
column-post, cut it about 1 in. too long, and trim 
it off to fit in its final position under the 
ridgepole. 

22. If nails at least 4 in. long are available, nail 
sloping cross-braces to the inner sides of the 
column-posts. If nails are not available, notch 
slightly bowed cross-braces and the column-post 
as illustrated; then lash or wire them in position. 
(Strips of ordinary bedsheets. torn about a foot 
wide and twisted together slightly, can be made 
to serve as lashing "rope.") To hold the tops of 
the column-posts securely against the upper ends 
of the cross-braces, a tightened "rope" loop that 
encircles the tops of the column-posts can be 
used. 

23. Next put four of the larger-diameter. 9-ft roof- 
poles in position, with the outsides of the 
outermost two roof poles each only about 1 in. 
from an end of the ridge pole. 

24. Place the rest of the 9-ft roof-poles in position, 
making sure that all their small ends are 
uppermost, and that they are pressed together 

and overlap on the ridgepole at least as far as 
illustrated. Pack earth between their lower ends. 
If the earth is clay, put small spacers of wood 
between the ends. 

25. At each end of the shelter room, build extra 
shelter space and an entryway. First position two 
14-ft poles with their upper ends resting on the 
outermost wall poles. Study Fig. A.5. Place the 
two 14-ft poles 20 in. apart, parallel, and equally 
distant from the centerline of the ridgepole. Nail 
four 20-in.-long spacer-poles between each pair 
of 14-ft poles, as illustrated. To make sure that 
the upper ends do not move before earth pressure 
holds them in place, tie the upper ends of the 14-ft 
poles together. Drive a stake against the lower 
end of each 14-ft pole, to keep it from slipping 
outward. Under the center of each 14-ft pole, 
place two supporting, vertical posts. 

26. Dig. 4-in.-deep trenches for the lower ends of the 
sloping end-wall poles of the main room. These 
poles must be cut to length so that their upper 
ends will be about 4 in. above the outermost 9-ft 
roof pole against which they lean. Dig narrow, 
vertical trenches, about 8 in. deep, for all vertical 
wall poles that do not press against horizontal 
brace poles near the ground. 

27. Start placing the sloping end-wall poles. First 
place the longest pole, then the shorter poles—all 
touching. 

28. Across the open spaces between the 9-ft roof 
poles, place limbs and/or sticks roughly hori- 
zontally, as shown in the lower left-hand 
drawing. Be sure to use limbs or sticks that have 
diameters of at least V2 in. and put them no 
farther apart than 6 in. Leave needles and leaves 
on the limbs Do not leave sharp ends sticking 
upward. Do not place more than a 6-in.-thick 
mass of limbs and leaves over the sida-pcles. The 
thickness of the earth cover necessary for 
excellent fallout protection might be uninten- 
tionally reduced by making the limb cover too 
thick. 

29. Place bedsheets (or 4-mil-thickipolyethylene film 
or equally sturdy material) over the limbs and 
sticks to keep earth from falling through the roof. 

30. To prevent sand or dry earth from falling 
between the cracks where the poles are side by 
side, cover these parts of the roof with cloth, 
plastic, or paper. If these materials are not 

157 

available, use sticks, leaves, and grass. (In tick or 
chigger season, avoid using grass or leaves from 
on or near the ground.) 

31. After the entryways are completed, begin to 
cover the shelter with earth. Starting from the 
ground up, put on a full 1-ft thickness of earth 
cover. First raise its height about a foot on one 
side or end of the shelter, and then on the 
other—repeatedly. This is to prevent unequal 
loading from tipping the shelter or pushing it 
over. (Do not excavate any earth closer than 3 ft 
to the line of stakes marking the final outer edge 
of the completed, 2-ft-thick earth cover.) 

32. Fill the spaces between the entryways and the 
main room only with earth. (An equal thickness 
of wood or other light material provides much 
less protection against radiation.) 

33. Before placing the rainproofing material for the 
"buried roof," smooth the surface of the 1-ft- 
thick earth cover. This will prevent sharp rocks 
or sticks from puncturing the plastic or other 
rainproofing material. If you do not have 
sufficient waterproofing materials to cover the 
whole roof, use what is available to rainproof the 
central part, on both sides of the ridgepole. 

34. To prevent rainwater on the ground outside from 
running into the entryways, make mounds of 
packed earth about 4 inches high across the 
entryway floors, about 2 ft from their outer ends. 

Dig a shallow drainage ditch completely around 
the earth mounded over the shelter. 

35. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter- 
. ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can 

feel air moving naturally. 

36. Complete the storage of water and other 

essentials. 

37. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the 
floor of the outer entryways, place a small 
awning (not illustrated) over each opening. 

38. Fill all available Water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

39. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve your chances of surviving by doing as 
many of the following things as possible; 

(1) Make a homemade fallout meter, as de- 

scribed in Appendix C. 

(2) Make expedient lights. 

(3) Make and hang expedient bedsheet- 

hammocks and bedsheet-chairs. 

158 

ü 
JC 

"o 
o. u 

60 
T3 

c 
3 
O 

60 

U > 
O 
< 
«r! 
< 
60 

Appendix A.6 
Aboveground, Crib-Walled Shelter 

PROTECTION PROVIDED 

Against fallout radiation: Protection Factor 200 
(PF 200) if the earth-filled cribs are built to the full 
width of 3 ft, as illustrated in Fig. A.6 at the end of 
these instructions. (A person in the open outside this 
shelter would receive about 200 times as much fallout 
radiation as he would if inside.) If earth is mounded 
to the top of the walls and 3 ft deep over the roof, the 
protection factor can be raised to PF 500 or better. 
See the accompanying drawing at the end of 
Appendix A.6. 

Against blast: Better protection than most 
homes. Without blast doors, occupants could be 
injured—although probably not fatally—at lower 
overpressure ranges than those that would destroy 
this shelter. 

Against fire: Poor, if the shelter is built as 
illustrated. The cloth and outer poles would be 
unprotected from thermal pulse and other possible 
sources of intense heat. However, if earth is mounded 
around the walls so as to cover all exposed cloth and 
wood, good fire protection would be provided. 

WHERE PRACTICAL 

The crib-walled shelter is practical in many 
wooded areas and whenever enough poles are 
available, or in locations where beiowground 
expedient shelters are impractical because the water 
table or rock is too close to the surface for a covered- 
trench shelter. 

FOR WHOM PRACTICAL 

For a family or group with three or more 
members able to work very hard for most of 48 hours. 
An unskilled family with an ax or saw and materials 

found in most American homes can build this shelter. 
No nails are required. (Groups with the nails, tools, 
skill, and the number of workers required to build a 
Ridgepole Shelter are advised to do so; a Crib-Walled 
Shelter requires almost twice the total length of poles 
and more work to provide shelter for a given number 
of persons.) 

CAPACITY 

The shelter illustrated in .1 is the minimum 
length for 5 persons. For each additional person, add 
l'/2 ft to the length of the room. (If more than about 
12 persons are to be sheltered, build 2 or more 
separate shelters.) 

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS 

1. Before beginning work, study the drawing and 

read ALL of the following instructions. 

2. Divide the work. CHECK OFF EACH STEP 

WHEN COMPLETED. 

3. By the time the shelter is finished, plan to have 
completed a ventilating pump (a KAP 20 in. wide 
and 26 in. high, essential for this shelter except in 
cool weather) and the storage of at least 15 
gallons of water per occupant. (See Appendix B 
and Chapter 8.) 

4. Start to assemble materials and re jis. 

A. Essential Materials and Tools 

• Poles. (Fresh-cut, green poles are best; 
sound, untreated poles are satisfactory.) For 
the illustrated 5-person shelter, the required 
poles are listed on the following page. 

159 

160 

Use 

Pole Length 

Minimum Diameter of 
Small End 

Number of Width When All 

Poles 
Required 

Are Laid on 
the Ground0 

Sides of longest crib 
Sides of middle-sized 

crib 

Sides of shortest crib 
Ends of all cribs 
Vertical poles at the 
- comers of all cribs 
Main roof 
Ehtryway roofs 

12% ft 

10 ft 
7 ft 
3% ft 

3% ft 
9 ft 
5 ft. 

3 in. 

3 in. 
3 in. 
3 in. 

2 in. 
3% in. 
2Hin. 

7 ft 

7 ft 
7 ft 
21ft 

12 ft 
22 ft 

56 

This width is the distance measured across a single layer of poles when a sufficient number of them are 
laid on the ground side by side and touching, with large ends and small ends alternating so as to cover a rec- 
tangular area. 

• A saw (preferably a bow saw with an 
extra blade, or a crosscut saw) and/or an 
ax—-for cutting green poles. 

• A shovel (one for each two workers is 
desirable). 

® A pick (if the ground is very hard). 

• Two to five large cans, buckets, and /or 
pots with bail handles, in which to carry earth 
and to store water or wastes later. 

• A knife. 

• A minimum of 300 ft of wire at least as 
strong as clothesline wire. Second choice 
would be 300 ft of rope, or (third choice) 8 
double-bed sheets that could betorn into 1-ft- 
wide strips and twisted slightly to serve as 
rope. For each additional person beyond 5, 
supply 20 ft of wire or rope cr half a double- 
bed sheet. 

• Rainproof roofing materials—at least 2 
square yards per person. Such materials as 
plastic film, shower curtains, plastic table- 
cloths or plastic mattress covers can be used. 
These materials are essential for prolonged 
shelter occupancy in rainy, cold weather. 

• Containers for storing 15 gallons of 
water per occupant. (See Chapter 8.) 

B. Useful Materials and Tools 

© Additional saws and shovels, chain saw, 
pick-mattock, hammer, hatchet. 

© Kerosene, turpentine, or oil—to keep a 
hand-saw from sticking in gummy wood. 

• A file. 

• Two additional double-bed sheets per 
person, or equivalent square-yardage of 
other equally strong fabric or plastic. 

• A measuring tape, yardstick, or ruler. 

® Old newspapers (about 15 pounds). 

• A total of 30 square yards of rainproof- 
ing materials for the illustrated 5-person 
shelter, and 3 square yards for each addi- 
tional person to be sheltered. (Even thin 
plastic will serve to make a rainproof "buried 
roof.") 

5. To save time and work, SHARPEN ALL 

TOOLS AND KEEP THEM SHARP. 

® Fifteen double-bed sheets (or equal 
square-yardage of other strong cloth or 
plastic). 

6. Wear gloves from the start. Even tough hands 
can blister and become painful and infected after 
hours of digging and chopping. 

® Materials for building a ventilating 
pump, a KAP 20 inches wide and 30 in. high. 
(See Appendix B.) 

7. Select a shelter location where there is little or no 
chance of the ground being covered with water 
bv a hard rain. 

8. If the building site is near the edge of a woods, 
pick a site at least 40 ft from the nearest trees—to 
avoid roots. 

9. Clear off grass, weeds, etc., from the area where 
you plan to build the shelter—this also will help 
to avoid chiggers or ticks. Do not remove any 
earth. 

10. Stake out the entire shelter, locating the 6 
required cribs. BE SURE TO MAKE THE 
INSIDE LENGTH OF THE MAIN ROOM 
EQUAL TO THE NUMBER OF PERSONS 
TO BE SHELTERED MULTIPLIED BY l'/2 
FT. The illustrated shelter is .sized for 5 persons, 
and the poles listed are those required for this 
5-person shelter. 

11. While some persons are staking out the shelter, 
others should be cutting green poles and hauling 
them to the site. Cut poles with tops no smaller 
than the diameters specified. (Note: the specified 
diameters do not include bark.) 

12. Select poles with small-end diameters no more 
than 50% larger than the specified minimum 
diameters, to make handling of the long wall and 
roof poles easier. 

13. Sort the poles by length and diameter and lay all 
poles of each size together, near the excavation. 

14. Use larger trees and poles, up to 6 in. in diameter, 
to make the 3'/2-ft-long end-poles of the cribs 
(Fig. A.6). Do not use poles with small-end 
diameters of less than 3 in. for the side-wall poles 
of the cribs. For vertical brace-poles, use poles 
with diameters of at least 2 in., cut off at the 
height of the upper side of the uppermost 
horizontal poles against which they are tied. 

15. Be sure to cut off all limbs so that the poles are 
quite smooth. Usually it is easier to drag 
smoothed poles to the building site before cutting 
them into the required lengths. Pull them by the 
small, lighter ends. 

16. Determine if there are enough long poles to make 
the side-poles of the two cribs forming the sides 
of the shelter room without splicing two shorter 
poles together. If the shelter is being built for 
more than 7 persons, it will require side poles that 
are longer than 15l/2 ft. Therefore, if a shelter for 
more than 7 persons is being built, it would be 
best to use 2 cribs placed end-to-end on each side 
of the shelter room, instead of a single crib as 
illustrated by Fig. A.6. 

17. Place the lowermost four poles of each of the 
cribs in their finai positions, so that all the bases 
of the crib-walls are in position on the ground. 
Use the thicker, heavier poles at and near the 
bottom of each crib. BE SURE THE ROOM IS 
LONG ENOUGH TO PROVIDE i',2 FT OF 
ROOM LENGTH FOR EACH PERSON TO 
BE SHELTERED. 

18. To build each crib: 

(1) Place two 31;:-ft end-poles on the ground. 
Put two of the side-poles on top of the two 
end-poles so that the ends of all four poles 
extend 3 in. (no more) beyond where they 
cross. The thicker poles should be used first 
to add stability. 

(2) Stack additional pairs of end-poles and side- 
poles to form the crib, keeping each wall of 
the crib vertical, until the tops of the 
uppermost side-poles are at least 42 in. above 
the ground. To keep the uppermost poles of 
the crib about level while the crib is being 
raised, alternate the large ends and small 
ends of poles. 

(3) Place a pair of small, vertical brace-poles in 
each of the four corners of the crib. The tops 
of the vertical brace-poles should be no 
higher above the ground than the upper sides 
of the crib's uppermost horizontal poles. 

(4) Tie each pair of vertical brace-poles together 
tightly at bottom, middle, and top. For tying, 
use 3-ft lengths of strong wire, rope, or 
slightly twisted, foot-wide strips of cloth at 
least as strong as cotton bed sheeting. Square 
knots with back-up overhand knots are best, 
but three overhand knots—one on top ofthe 
other—will hold. 

(5) If the crib is more than 8 ft long, place an 
additional pair of vertical brace-poles, with 
one in position at the outside center of each 
long crib-wall. Tie this pair of vertical brace- 
poles together permanently just above the 
ground, but not yet in the middle or near the 
top ofthe crib. Temporarily tie each of these 
center vertical brace-poles to the uppermost 
side-pole of the wall it touches. 

(6) Line the crib with cloth or plastic film, 
making sure that several inches of the lining 
hangs over the uppermost poles. So that the 
lining will not be pulled down when the crib 
is being filled with earth, tie the upper edge of 

162 

the lining to the uppermost wall pole about 
every 2 ft. First cut a small hole through 
which to thread a tie-string or a 2-in.-wide 
tie-strip of cloth. (If plenty of cloth and/or 
plastic is available for lining the cribs, secure 
the lining by simply wrapping a greater width 
of the upper edge of the lining around the 
uppermost crib wall-pole.) 

(7) Permanently tie together the pair_of vertical 
center brace-poles, using horizontal ties at 
their centers and just below the uppermost 
horizontal wall-poles of the crib. Use the 
strongest material you have for these 
horizontal ties across the center of the crib. 

(8) Excavate earth 10 ft or so beyond the outer 
sides of the cribs. To save work, carry it in 
buckets and dump it inside the cribs. (Two 
children can carry a heavy bucket of earth by 
running a strong, 4-ft stick through the bail 
or handle of the bucket and tying the bail to 
the center of the stick before lifting.) Save 
earth closer to the cribs to put on the roof. 

(9) Fill the lined crib with earth from which 
almost all grass, roots, and the like have been 
removed. Avoid placing hard lumps of earth 
in contact with the lining. Fill the crib so that 
the surface of the earth inside it is about 4 in. 
above the upper sides of the uppermost 
horizontal poles. 

19. Line the narrow spaces between adjacent cribs 
with cloth or plastic; then fill these spaces with 
earth a little at a time, tamping repeatedly so as to 
avoid leaving air spaces. 

20. Place the 9-ft roof poles over the main room. (If 
poles are unavailable and boards 1 '/2 in. thick are 
available, use two thicknesses of boards.) Use the 
strongest roof poles (or double-thickness boards 
nailed together) nearest the entryways. Then put 
shorter, 5- or 6-ft poles or boards over the 
entryways. 

21. To keep earth from falling through the cracks 
between the roof poles, put sticks in the larger 
cracks and cover the roof with two or more thick- 
nesses of cloth, plastic, or other material. News- 
papers will do, if better materials are lacking. 

22. Put earth on the roof to the depths shown for the 
illustrated "buried roof." Be sure to slope all sides 
and smooth this gently mounded earth surface so 
that the buried roof will shed water. 

23. So that the earth cover near the outer edges of the 
roof will be a full 2 ft thick, make the earth cover 
slope steeply near the edges. Steep earth slopes 
can be made and kept stable by using large lumps 
of turf to make a steep bank, or by using earth- 
filled "rolls" of cloth or other material along the 
edges of a roof. 

24. Put in place the waterproof material of the 

buried roof. 

25. Pile on the rest of the earth cover, as illustrated, 

to at least a full 2-ft thickness. 

26. Smooth the surface of the earth cover, including 
the sides, so that rain will run off. Do not walk on 
the finished roof. 

27. To prevent rainwater on the ground outside from 
running into the entryways, make mounds of 
packed earth about 4 in. high across the entryway 
floors. Make the mounds about 2 ft from the 
outer ends of the floors. Dig a shallow drainage 
ditch completely around the shelter. 

28. Unless the weather is cold, install your shelter- 
ventilating KAP in the entry into which you can 
feel the air moving naturally. 

29. To prevent fallout or rain from falling onto the 
floor of the outer entryways, place small awnings 
(not illustrated) over the openings. 

30. If time and energy are available, mound earth all 
around the shelter. Doing so will reduce fire 
hazards by covering flammable materials; it also 
will increase fallout protection. 

31. Fill all available water containers, including pits 
which have been dug and lined with plastic, then 
roofed with available materials. If possible, 
disinfect all water stored in expedient containers, 
using one scant teaspoon of a chlorine bleach, 
such as Clorox, for each 10 gallons of water. 
Even if only muddy water is available, store it. If 
you do not have a disinfectant, it may be possible 
to boil water when needed. 

32. As time and materials permit, continue to 
improve your chances of surviving by doing as 
many of the following things as possible: 

(1) Make a homemade fallout meter, as de- 

scribed in Appendix C. 

(2) Make expedient lights. 

(3) Make and hang expedient bedsheet- 

hammocks. 

' vyC _ 

o>a 

Jjja'bo &s 
^! 

^ij^fO 

sas3s* 

I 
L_— " 7^ 

o 
n 
a 
*t 
a 
s 
a 
_i 
z 
a: 
O 

f«^1- " ?~T| 

"• -I c J NOH9IH ™?T -T J qH 

X *« ... 'ujj*"-» ■ , J 

fa 

- 3is4 
tfSS* 

163 

J3 

-3 

"a 

U 
•o 
e 
3 
O 
u 
BD 
> 
o 
ja 
< 

< 

0 fee 

35 

Appendix B 
How to Make and Use a Homemade 
Shelter-Ventilating Pump, the KAP 

I. THE NEED FOR SHELTER AIR PUMPS 

In warm weather, large volumes of outside air 
MUST be pumped through most fallout or blast 
shelters if they are crowded and occupied for a day or 
more. Otherwise, the shelter occupants' body heat 
and water vapor will raise the temperature-humidity 
conditions to DANGEROUSLY high levels. If 
adequate volumes of outdoor air are pumped 
through typical belowground shelters in hot weather, 
many times the number of persons could survive the 
heat than otherwise could survive in these same 
shelters without adequate forced ventilation. Even in 
cold weather, about 3 cubic feet per minute (3 cfm) of 
outdoor air usually should be pumped through 
shelters, primarily to keep the carbon dioxide 
exhaled by shelter occupants from rising to harmful 
concentrations. 

The KAP (Kearny Air Pump) is a practical, do- 
it-yourself device for pumping adequate volumes of 
cooling air through shelters—with minimum work. 
The following instructions have been improved 
repeatedly after being used by dozens of small groups 
to build KAP5—including families, pairs of house- 
wives, and children. None of these inexpert builders 
had previously heard of this kind of pump, yet almost 
all groups succeeded in making one in less than 4 
hours after assembling the materials. Their successes 
prove that almost anyone, if given these detailed and 
thoroughly tested instructions, can build a ser- 
viceable, large-volume air pump of this simple type, 
using only materials and tools found in most 
American homes. 

If possible, build a KAP large enough to pump 
through your shelter at least 40 cubic feet per minute 

(40 cfm) of outdoor air for each shelter occupant. If 
40 cfm of outdoor air is pumped through a shelter 
and distributed within it as specified below, even 
under heat-wave condftiohsthe effective temperature 
of the shelter air will not be more than 2° F higher 
than the effective temperature outdoors. (The 
effective temperature is a measure of air's effects on 
people due to its heat, humidity, and velocity.) The 
36-inch-high by 29-inch-wide KAP described in these 
instructions, if used as specified, will pump at least 
1000 cfm of outside air through a shelter that has the 
airflow characteristics outlined in these instructions. 

If more than 25 persons might be expected to 
occupy a shelter during hot weather, then it is 
advisable to build a larger KAP.The72-inch-high by 
29-inch-wide model described can pump between 
4000 and 5000 cfm. 

To maintain tolerable temperature-humidity 
conditions for people in your shelter during hot 
weather, you must: 

® Pump enough outdoor air all the way through 
the shelter (40 cfm for each occupant in very hot, 
humid weather). 

© Distribute the air evenly within the shelter. If the 
KAP that pumps air through the shelter does not 
create air movement that can be felt in all parts of the 
shelter in hot weather, one or more additional KAPs 
will be needed to circulate the air and gently fan the 
occupants. 

• Encourage the shelter occupants to wear as little 
clothing as practical when they are hot. (Sweat 
evaporates and cools best on bare skin.) 

Preceding page blank 

165 

166 

© Supply the occupants with adequate water and 
salt. For prolonged shelter occupancy under heat- 
wave conditions in a hot part of the country, about 4 
quarts of drinking water and '/3 ounce (1 tablespoon) 
of salt per person are required every 24 hours, 
including salt in food that is eaten. Normal American 
meals supply about '/4 ounce of salt daily. Salt taken 
in addition to that in food should be dissolved in the 
drinking water. 

* Pump outdoor air through your shelter day and 
night in warm weather, so that both the occupants 
and the shelter are cooled off at night. 

Almost all of the danger from fallout is caused 
by radiation from visible fallout particles of heavy, 
sand-like material. The air does not become 
radioactive due to the radiation continuously given 
off by fallout particles. 

The visible fallout particles rapidly "fall out" of 
slow moving air. The air that a KAP pumps through 
a shelter moves at a low speed and could carry into 
the shelter only a very small fraction of the fallout 
particles that cause the radiation hazard outside. This 
fraction, usually not dangerous, can be further 
reduced if occupants take the simple precautions 
described in these instructions. 

CAUTION 

Before anyone starts to build this unusual type 
of air pump, ALL WORKERS SHOULD READ 
THESE INSTRUCTIONS AT LEAST UP TO 
SECTION V, INSTALLATION. Otherwise, mis- 
takes may be made and work may be divided 
inefficiently. 

When getting ready to build this pump, all 
workers should spend the first half-hour studying 
these instructions and getting organized. Then, after 
materials are assembled, two inexperienced persons 
working together should be able to complete the 3- 
foot model described in the following pages in less 
than 4 hours. To speed up completion, divide the 
work; for example, one person can start making the 
flaps while another begins work on the pump frame. 

II. HOW A KAP WORKS 

As can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2. a KAP operates 
by being swung like a pendulum. It is hinged at the 
top of its swinging frame. When this air pump is 
pulled by a cord as illustrated, its flaps are closed by 
air pressure and it pushes air in front of it and "sucks" 

ORNL-DWG 66-I2320A 

UNUSED PARTS OF DOORWAY COVERED, 

. Section through the upper part of a 

doorway, showing operation of a KAP. 

ORNL-DWG 66-12319A 

DOOR CASING 

PULL CORD SLACK 
DURING RETURN 
STROKE 

\ 

SWINGING 
PUMP FRAME 

PULL CORD *V> ' 

PULLING >C . v.\/ 

FLAPS 
CLOSED 
(POWER STROKE 
OF THIS SAME PUMP) 

COVERING OVER UNUSED 
LOWER PART OF DOORWAY 

. KAP in doorway (with flaps open during 

its return stroke). 

air in back of it. Thus a KAP pumps air through the 
opening in which it swings. This is the power stroke. 
During its power stroke, the pump's flaps are closed 
against its flap-stop wires or strings, which are 
fastened across the face of the frame. 

When a KAP swings freely back as a pendulum 
on its return stroke, all its flaps are opened by air 

pressure. The pumped air stream continues to flow in 
the direction in which it has been accelerated by the 
power stroke, while the pump itself swings in the 
opposite direction (see ). Thus the flaps are 
one-way valves that operate to force air to flow in one 
direction, where desired. 

The KAP can be used: (1) to supply outdoor air 
to a shelter, (2) to distribute air within a shelter, 
and/or to fan the occupants. 

1. To force outdoor air through a shelter, an air- 
supply KAP usually is operated as an air-intake 
pump by pulling it with a cord (see ). (Only 
rarely is it necessary to operate a KAP as an air- 
exhaust pump by pushing it with a pole, as described 
in the last section of these instructions.) 

2. To distribute air within a shelter and/or to 
fan the occupants, air-distribution KAPs may be 
hung overhead and operated as described later. 

III. INSTRUCTIONS FOR BUILDING A KAP 

In this section, instructions are given for making 
a KAP 36 inches high and 29 inches wide, to operate 
efficiently when swinging in a typical home basement 
doorway 30 inches wide. If your doorway or other 
ventilation opening is narrower or wider than 30 
inches, you should make your KAP 1 inch narrower 
than the narrowest opening in which you plan to 
install it. Regardless of the size of the KAP you plan 
to build, first study the instructions for making the 
36 X 29-inch model. 

In Section VII you will find brief instructions for 
making a narrower and even simpler KAP, one more 
suitable for the narrow openings of small trench 
shelters and other smaii expedient shelters. Section 
VIII covers large KAPs, for large shelters. 

A. Materials Needed for a KAP 
36 inches High by 29 inches Wide 

The preferred material is listed as first (1st) 
choice, and the less-preferred materials are listed as 
(2nd), (3rd), and (4th) choices. It is best to assemble, 
spread out, and check all your materials before 
beginning to build. 

1. The pump frame and its fixed support: 

® Boards' for the frame: 

(1st) 22 ft of 1 X 2-in. boards. (A nominal 
1 X 2-in. board actually measures about 

167 

% X 1-% in., but the usual, nominal dimen- 
sions will be given throughout these instruc- 
tions.) Also, 6 ft of 1 X 1 -in. boards. Soft wood 
is better. 

(2nd) Boards of the same length that have 
approximately the same dimensions as 1 X 2- 
in. and 1 X 1-in. lumber. 

(3rd) Straight sticks or metal strips that 
can be cut and fitted to make a flat-faced KAP 
frame. 

O Hinges: (1st) Door or cabinet butt-hinges; (2nd) 
metal strap-hinges; (3rd) improvised hinges made of 
leather, woven straps, cords, or 4 eyescrews which 
can be joined to make 2 hinges. (Screws are best for 
attaching hinges. If nails are used, they should go 
through the board and their ends should be bent over 
and clinched—flattened against the surface of the 
board.) 

• A board for the fixed horizontal support: (1 st) A 
1 X 4-in. board that is at least 1 ft longer than the 
width of the opening in which you plan to swing your 
pump; (2nd) A wider board. 

• Small nails (at least 24): (1st) No. 6 box nails, 
about '/2 in. longer than the thickness of the two 
boards, so their pointed ends can be bent over and 
clinched); (2nd) other small nails. 

2. The flaps (See Figs. 1, 2, 6, 7, and 8): 

® Plastic film or other very light, flexible materi- 
al—12 square feet in pieces that can be cut into 9 
rectangular strips, each 30 X 5'/'2 in.: (1st) polyeth- 
ylene film 3 or 4 mils thick (3 or 4 one-thousandths of 
an inch); (2nd) 2-mil polyethylene from large trash 
bags; (3rd) tough paper. > 

® Pressure-sensitive waterproof tape, enough to 
make 30 ft of tape % in. to 1 in. wide, for securing the 
hem-tunnels of the flaps: (1st) cloth duct tape (silver 
tape); (2nd) glass tape; (3rd) scotch tape; (4th) freezer 
or masking tape, or sew the hem tunnels. (Do not use 
a tape that stretches: it may shrink afterward and 
cause the flaps to wrinkle.) 

3. The flap pivot-wires: 

(1st) 30 ft of smooth wire at least &s heavy and 
springy as coat hanger wire, that can be made into 
very straight pieces each 29 in. long (nine all-wire 
coat hangers will supply enough); (2nd) 35 ft of 
somewhat thinner wire, including light, flexible 
insulated wire; (3rd) 35 ft of smooth string, preferably 
nylon string about the diameter of coat hanger wire. 

4. The pull cord: 

(1st) At least 10 ft of cord; (2nd) strong string; 

IX2-in. FRAME 

ORNL DWG 71-7003 

NAIL HEADS 

NOTE: 
ALL WOOD FOR FRAME 
IS CUT FROM 1X2 in. 
EXCEPT 1X1 in. CENTER 
BRACE 

IXiin. CENTER BRACE 

. KAP frame (looking at the back side of 

the frame). 

b. To make the front side smooth and flat so 
that the flaps will close tightly, fill in the spaces as 
follows: Cut two pieces of 1 X 2-in. boards long 
enough to fill in the spaces on top of the 36-in. sides of 
the frame between the top and bottom horizontal 
boards, and nail these filler boards in place. Do the 
same thing with a 1 X 1-in. board (or a board the size 
of that used for the center brace) as a filler board for 
the center brace (see ). 

If the frame is made of only one thickness of 
n/4 in. to 1 in. thick, it will not be sufficiently 
board 3 
heavy to swing back far enough on its free-swinging 
return stroke. 

(3rd) flexible, light wire. 

5. The flap-stops: 

® (1st) 150 ft of light string; (2nd) 150 ft of light, 
smooth wire; (3rd) 150 ft of very strong thread; (4th) 
600 ft of ordinary thread, to provide 4 threads for 
each stop-flap. 

«3 (1st) 90 tacks (not thumbtacks); (2nd) 90 small 
nails. (Tacks or nails are desirable but not essential, 
since the flap-stops can be tied to the frame.) 

B. Tools 

A hammer, saw, wirecutter pliers, screwdriver, 
scissors, knife, yardstick, and pencil are desirable. 
However, only a strong, sharp knife is essential for 
making some models. 

C. Building a KAP 36 inches High by 29 inches Wide 

A 36 X 29-in. KAP is most effective if operated in 
an air-intake or exhaust opening about 40 in. high 
and 30 in. wide. (If your shelter might have more than 
25 occupants in hot weather, read all these 
instructions so you will understand how to build a 
larger pump, briefly described in Section VIII.) 

NOTE THAT THE WIDTHS AND THICK- 
NESSES OF ALL FRAME PIECES ARE EXAG- 
GERATED IN ALL ILLUSTRATIONS. 

1. The frame 

a. Cut two pieces of 1 X 2-in. boards, each 36 in. 
long, and two pieces cf 1 X 2-in. boards, each 29 in. 
long; then nail them together(see ). Use nails 
that do not split the wood, preferably long enough to 
go through the boards and stick out about V2 in. on 
the other side. (To nail in this manner, first put blocks 
under the frame so that the nail points will not strike 
the floor.) Bend over nail points which go through. 

Next, cut and nail to the frame a piece of 1 X 1 -in. 
lumber 36 in. long, for a center vertical brace. (If you 
lack time to make or to find a 1 X 1-in. board, use a 
1 X 2-in. board.) shows the back side of the 
frame; the flap valves will be attached on the front 
(the opposite) side. 

169 

ORNL-OWG S6-12322A 

■S*~ 

NOTE PART OF 
HINGE THAT 
STICKS OUT 
FARTHEST IS 
TO THE FRONT 

BACK 

NOTE HINGES ARE ON 
THE FAR (=THE FRONT) 
SIDE OF FRAME 

2. The hinges 

Ordinary door butt-hinges are 
best. So that the pump can swing 
past the horizontal position, the 
hinges should be screwed onto the 
front of the frame, at its top, in the 
positions shown in.. (Pick 
one of the 29-in. boards and call it 
the top.) If you do not have a drill 
for drilling a screw hole, you can 
make a hole by driving a nail and 
then pulling it out. Screw the 
screw into the nail hole. 

3. The pivot-wires and flaps 

a. Make 9 flap pivot-wires. If you have smooth, 
straight wire as springy and thick as coat hanger wire, 
use it to make nine 29-in.-long straight lengths of 
wire. If not, use wire from all-wire coat hangers or use 
strings. First, cut off all of the hook portion of each 
coat hanger, including the twisted part. If you have 
only ordinary pliers, use the cutter to "bite" the wire 
all around; it will break at this point if bent there. 
Next, straighten each wire carefully. Straighten all 
the bends so that each wire is straight withinl/* in., as 
compared to a straight line. Proper straightening 
takes 1 to 5 minutes per wire. To straighten, 
repeatedly grasp the bent part of the wire with pliers 
in slightly different spots, each time bending the wire 
a little with your other hand. Then cut each wire to a 
29-in. length. Finally, bend no more than ','2 in. of 
each end at a right angle and in the same plane—that 
is, in directions so that all parts of the bent wire will 
lie flat against a smooth surface. The bent ends are for 
secure attachment later (see ). 

b. Make 9 polyethylene flaps that will be the 
hinged valves of the KAP. First cut 9 strips. 

. Completing the frame. 

making each strip 30 in. long by S'/z-in. wide (see 
). To cut plastic flaps quickly and accurately, 
cut a long strip of plastic 30 in. wide. Then cut off a 
flap in this way: (1) draw a cutting guideline on a 
wide board 5'/2 in- from an edge; (2) place the 
30-in.-wide plastic strip so that it lies on this board, 
with one of the strip's side edges just reaching the 
edge of the board; (3) place a second board over 

OfiML CW8 7)-T0O4A 

SECURE F.N0 OF TAPE 
TU BACK SIDE - 

. 

170 

the plastic on the first board, with a straight edge 
of this second upper board over the guideline on 
the lower board; and finally (4) cut off a flap by 
running a sharp knife along the straight edge of the 
upper board. 

To form a hem along one of the 30-in. sides of 
a 5!/2 X 30-in. rectangular strip, fold in a 1-in. hem. 
This makes the finished flap 4l/2 in. wide. 

To hold the folded hem while taping it, paper 
clips or another pair of hands are helpful. For each 
hem, use two pieces of pressure-sensitive tape, each 
about 1 in. wide and 16 in. long. Or make the hem 
by sewhg it very close to the cut edge to form a 
hem-tunnel (see ). 

After the hem has been made, cut a notch with 
scissors in each hemmed corner of the flap (Figs. 6 
and 8). Avoid cutting the tape holding the hem. 
Each notch should extend downward about V2 in. 
and should extend horizontally from the outer edge 
of the flap to '/< in. inside the inner side of the 
frame, when the flap is positioned on the frames as 
shown in . 

ORNL-OWG 66-12324 

of each flap, like a curtain rod running through the 
hem of a curtain. Check to see that each flap 
swings freely on its pivot-wire, as illustrated by . Also see . 

ORNL-DWG 66-12325 

END OF PIVOT-WIRE (THAT 

WILL BE FIXED TO PUMP FRAMEk 

HEItf-TUWNEL- 

FLAP 

29- in. PIVOT-WIRE 
WITH fiNDS BENT UP V2 

. End view. 

ORNL DWG 71-7005A 

. Sizes of notches in flaps. 

Also cut a notch in the center of the flap 
(along the hem line) extending '/: in- downward 
and extending horizontally '/« in. beyond each of 
the two sides of the vertical brace (see ). The 
notch MUST be wider than the brace. [However, if 
you are building a pump using wire netting for 
flap-stops (see ), then do NOT cut a notch in 
the center of each flap.] 

c. Take the 9 pieces of straightened wire and 
insert one of them into and through the hem-tunnel 

. 

d. Put aside the flaps and their pivot-wires for 
use after you have attached the flap-stops and the 
hinges to the frame, as described below. 

e. Using the ruler printed on the edge of this 
page, mark the positions of each pivot-wire (the 
arrowheads numbered 0, 35/8, 7'/4 in.) and the 
position of each flap-stop (the four marks between 
each pair of numbered arrowheads on this ruler). 
All of these positions should be marked both on 
the vertical sides of the 36-in.-long boards of the 
frame and on the vertical brace. Mark the position 
of the uppermost pivot-wire (the "0" arrowhead on 
this ruler) % in. below the top board to which the 
hinges have been attached (see Figs. 9 and 10). 

HINGES IN FRONT 

ORNL OWG 71-70064 

MARKS FOR FLAP 
PIVOT-WIRES, ALL 
3%-in. APART 

171 

4. The flap-stops 

So that the flaps may swing open on only one 
side of the frame (on its front, or face), you must 
attach horizontal flap-stops made of strings or 
wires across the face of the frame. (See Figs. 10 and 
11.) Nail or tie four of these flap-stops between the 
marked points where each pair of the horizontal 
pivot-wires for the flaps will be placed. Be careful 
not to connect any flap-stops in such a way that 
they cross the horizontal open spaces in which you 
later will attach the flap pivot-wires. 

ORNL-DWG 71-7007» 

PIVOT-WIRE 

4 "STOPS" % in. APART. 

USE RULE ON EDGE OF 
PAGE. 

POSITIONS OF TWO 
ADJACENT PIVOT-WIRES 
3% in. APART. 

NOTE: 
SKETCH NOT DRAWN 
TO SCALE. 

. 

ORNL-DWG 66-12328A 

^FUTURE POSITION OF PIVOT- 

WIRE OF FLAP 

iffigS^^Ä 

Jt '/4in. 

FUTURE POSITION OF 

' TOP FLAP 

i 

VuTURE POSITION OF PIVOT-WIRE 

^MARKS FOR 4 FUTURE FLAP-STOPS, 

SPACED 34-in. APART 

. 

. Positions of pivot-wires and flap-stops. 

If you have tacks (NOT thumbtacks) or very 
small nails, drive three in a horizontal line to attach 
each flap-stop—two in the vertical 36-in. sides of 
the frame and one in the vertical center brace (see 
). First, drive all of these horizontal lines of 
tacks about three-quarters of the way into the 
boards. Then, to secure the flap-stop string or thin 
wire quickly to a tack, wind the string around the 
tack and immediately drive the tack tightly into the 
frame to grip the string (see ). 

If you have no tacks or nails, cut notches or 
slots where the flap-stops are to be attached. Cut 
these notches in the edges of the vertical sides of 
the frame and in an edge of the center brace. Next, 
secure the flap-stops (strings or wires> by tying each 

m - 

i C t»i r > 

o 

z 
o 
o ±A 

z 
V) 
o 

r _. 
> ? 
-a 

< 
o 
H 
I 
% 
3D 
m 
CO 
> 
z 
o 
1\ r 

to 
H o 

172 

one in its notched position. This tying should 
include wrapping each horizontal flap-stop once 
around the vertical center brace. The stops should 
be in line with (in the same plane as) the front of 
the frame. Do not stretch flap-stops too tightly, or 
you may bend the frame. 

5. Final assembly 

a. Staple, nail, or tie the 9 flap pivot-wires or 
pivot-strings (each with its flap attached) in their 
positions at the marked 35/8-in. spacings. Start with 
the lowest flap and work upward (see ). 
Connect each pivot-wire at both ends to the 36-in. 
vertical sides of the frame. Also connect it to the 
vertical brace. BE CAREFUL TO NAIL THE 
PIVOT-WIRES ONLY TO THE FRAME AND 
THE BRACE. DO NOT NAIL ANY PLASTIC 
DIRECTLY TO THE WOOD. All flaps must turn 
freely on their pivot-wires. 

If any flap, when closed, overlaps the flap 
below it by more than 1 in., trim off the excess so 
that it overlaps by only 1 in. 

b. Screw (or nail, if screws are not available) 
the upper halves of the hinges onto the horizontal 
support board on which the KAP will swing. (A 
1-in.-thick board is best, 3l/2 in. wide and at least 
12 in. longer than the width of the doorway or 
other opening in which this KAP is to be installed.) 

Be careful to attach the hinges in the UNusual, 

OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in . 

CAUTIONS: Do NOT attach a KAP's hinges 
directly to the door frame. If you do, the hinges 
will be torn loose on its return stroke or on its 
power stroke. 

If you are making a KAP to fit into a 
rectangular opening, make its frame 4 in. 
SHORTER than the height of its opening and 1 in. 
NARROWER than the width of the opening. 

c. For this 3-ft model, tie the pull-cord to the 
center brace about 12'/2 in. below the hinge line, as 
shown in . (If you tie it lower, your arm 
movements will waste energy.) Use small nails or 
wire to keep the tie end from slipping up or down 
on the center brace. (For a more durable 
connection, see .) 

Cut a slot in the flap above the connection of 
the pull-cord to the vertical brace, deep enough so 
that this flap will close completely when the KAP is 
being pulled. Tape the end and edges of the slot. 

ORNL-DWG 66-12330AR 

HORIZONTAL 
SUPPORT (N£J DIRECTLY Vh 
ABOVE THE PUMP FRAME) py , 

HINGE 

FLAPS SHOULD 
OVERLAP % in. 
TO 1 in. 

PULLCORD 
ATTACHED 
ABOUT I in. 
ABOVE THE 
FOURTH FLAP 
FROM THE TOP 

BACK OF PUMP 

(THIS DRAWING IS 
NOT TO SCALE) 

. Hinge is attached so pump can swing 

180 degrees. 

IV. MORE RAPID CONSTRUCTION 

(Skip this section if you cannot easily get 

chicken wire and '/«-m.-thick boards.) 

If chicken wire and boards about 1/A in. thick 
are available, use the chicken wire for flap-stops. 
By using these materials, the time required to build 
a given KAP can be reduced by about 40%. 
One-inch woven mesh is best. (Hardware cloth has 
sharp points and is unsatisfactory.) 

 illustrates how the mesh wire should 
be stapled to the KAP frame. Next, unless the KAP 
is wider than 3 ft, the front of the whole frame 
(except for the center brace) should be covered with 
thin boards approximately V2 m- thick, such as 
laths. Then the pivot-wires, with their flaps on 
them, should be stapled onto the '/-rm.-thick 
boards. This construction permits the flaps to turn 
freely in front of the chicken-wire flap-stops. 

With this design, the center of each pivot-wire 
should NOT be connected to the center brace, nor 
should the center of the flap be notched. However, 
pivot-wires that are attached this way must be 
made and held sträighter than pivot-wires used 
with flap-stops made of straight strings or wires. 

ORNL-OWG S6-12333A 

. Flaps attached % inch in front of 

chicken wire used for flap-stops. 

173 

Note in that each pivot-wire is held firm 
and straight by 2 staples securing each end. The 
wire used should be at least as springy as coat 
hanger wire. If string is used instead of wire, nylon 
cord about the diameter of coat hanger wire is best 
for the pivot-strings. 

If the KAP is wider than 3 ft, its center vertical 
brace should also be covered with a V4-in.-thick 
board, and each pivot-wire should be attached to it. 
Furthermore, the center of each flap should be 
notched. 

V. INSTALLATION AND ACCESSORIES 

A. Minimum Open Spaces Around a KAP 

To pump its maximum volume, an air-supply 
KAP with good metal hinges should be installed in 
its opening so that it swings only about % in. above 
the bottom of the opening and only xj2 in. to 1 in. 
from the sides of the opening. 

B. Adequately Large Air Passageways 

When using a KAP as an air-supply pump to 
force air through a shelter, it is essential to provide 
a low-resistance air passageway all the way through 
the shelter structure from an outdoor air-intake 
opening for outdoor air to a separate air-exhaust 
opening to the outdoors (see ). 

S6-1233IAR2 

PREFERABLY PUMP IN THE 
SAME DIRECTION AS THE 
NATURAL A\R FLOW AT 
THAT TIME. 

OUTOUO!» r:\\ ^OWSNG 
THROIJO; '.Urt'- RESISTANCE 
PASSAGEWS r'DOM OUT- 
DOORS 

TO LESSEN ENTRY OF FALL- 
OUT, IT IS BETTER TO PUT 
PUMP IN UPPER HALF OF 
DOORWAY, AND COVER LOWER 
HALF. 

. 

174 

A low-resistance air passageway is one that is 
no smaller in cross-sectional area than half the size 
of the KAP pumping the air. For example, a 
36 X 29-in. KAP should have a passageway no 
smaller than about 3'/2 sq. ft. An air-supply KAP of 
this size will force at least 1000 cubic feet per 
minute (1000 cfm) through a shelter having such 
openings, if it is installed as illustrated in . 

If smaller air passageways or air-exhaust 
openings are provided, the volume of air pumped 
will be greatly reduced. For example, if the 
air-exhaust opening is only ]J/4 sq. ft ('/„ the size of 
this KAP), then this KAP will pump only about 
500 cfm. And if the air-exhaust opening is only a 
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct ('/4 sq. ft), then this same 
36 X 29-in. KAP will pump only about 50 cubic 
feet per minute. This would not provide enough 
outdoor air for more than one shelter occupant in a 
well-insulated shelter under heat-wave conditions in 
the hottest humid parts of the United States. In 
contrast, when the weather is freezing cold and the 
shelter itself is still cold enough to absorb the heat 
produced by the shelter occupants, this same 
6 X 6-in. exhaust duct and the air-intake doorway 
will cause about 50 cfm of outdoor air to flow by 
itself through the shelter without using any pump. 
The reason: body heat warms the shelter air. and 
the warm air rises if cold air can flow in to replace 
it. Under these cold conditions—provided the air is 
distributed evenly throughout the shelter by KAP 

or otherwise—50 cfm is enough outdoor air for 
about 17 people. 

To provide adequately large air passageways 
for air-supply KAPs used to ventilate shelters in 
buildings, in addition to opening and closing doors 
and windows, it may be necessary to build large 
ducts (as described below). Breaking holes in 
windows, ceilings, or walls is another way to make 
large, efficient air passageways. 

 illustrates how a 3-ft KAP can be 
used as a combined air-supply and air-distribution 
pump to adequately ventilate a small underground 
shelter that has an exhaust opening too small to 
provide enough ventilation in warm weather. (A 
similar installation can be used to ventilate a 
basement room having only one opening, its 
doorway.) Note how, by installing a "divider" in 
the doorway and entryway, the single entryway is 
converted into a large air-intake duct and a 
separate, large air-exhaust duct. To obtain the 
maximum increased volume of fresh outdoor air 
that can be pumped through the shelter—a total of 
about 1000 cfm for a 36 X 29-in. KAP—the divider 
should extend about 4 ft horizontally into the 
shelter room, as shown in . The 6 ft at the 
end of the divider (the almost-horizontal part under 
the KAP) can be made of plywood, provided it is 
installed so that it can be taken out of the way in a 
few seconds. 

VENTILATION DUCT 
/THAT IS TOO SMALL IN 

/ WARM WEATHER 

ENTRYWAY DIVIDER 

ORNL DWG 72-6630 

FALLOUT ROOF (PLASTIC 
OR CLOTH) ON RIDGEPOLE 

"WALL" ALL AROUND 
ENTRYWAY 

- EARTH ON BOTTOM 

OF "WALL" 

STAKE SUPPORTING 2-ft-HIGH 
"WALL" OF PLASTIC OR CLOTH 
AROUND VERTICAL ENTRYWAY 

"PULLEY" 
6-ft DIVI 

FOR 3-ft KAP IN 
DED DOORWAY 

. Ventilating a shelter when the air-exhaust opening is too small. 

175 

Note how the entry of fallout into a shelter can 
be minimized by covering the entryway with a "roof" 
and by forcing the slow-moving entering air to rise 
over an obstruction (the "wall") before it flows into 
the shelter. The sand-like fallout particles fall to the 
ground outside the "wall." 

C. Adequate Distribution of 
Air Within the Shelter 

To make sure that each shelter occupant gets a 
fair share of the outdoor air pumped through the 
shelter, air-distribution KAPs should be used inside 
most large shelters. These KAPs are used within the 
shelter, separate from and in addition to air-supply 
KAPs (see ). Air-distribution KAPs can serve 
in place of both air-distribution ducts and cooling 
fans. For these purposes, one or more 3-ft-high KAPs 
hung overhead from the shelter ceiling are usually 
most practical. If KAPs cannot readily be hung from 
the ceiling, they can be supported on light frames 
made of boards or metal, somewhat like those used 
for a small child's swing. 

KAP for every 25 occupants. In relatively wide 
shelters, these interior KAPs should be positioned so 
that they produce an airflow that circulates around 
the shelter, preventing the air that is being pumped 
into the shelter from flowing directly to the exhaust 
opening. illustrates how four KAPs can be 
used in this way to distribute the air within a shelter 
and to fan the 100 occupants of a 1000-sq.-ft shelter 
room. Avoid positioning an air-distribution KAP so 
that it pumps air in a direction greater than a right 
angle turn from the direction of airflow to the 
location of the KAP. 

D. Operation with a Pulley 

A small KAP—especially one with improvised 
hinges or one installed at head-height or higher—can 
be pulled most efficiently by running its pull-cord 
over a pulley or over a greased homemade "pulley" 
such as described in Figs. 17 and 18. A pulley should 
be hung at approximately the same height as the 
hinges of the KAP, as illustrated in . To make 

ORNL DWG 72-7547 

ORNL DWG 71-7242 

Y-BRIDLE OF LIGHT CORD / 
■OR WIRE / 

. The use of air-distribution KAPs. 

You should make and use enough KAPs to 
cause air movement that can be felt in all parts of 
your shelter. Remember that if KAPs are installed 
near the floor and the shelter is fully occupied, the 
occupants' bodies will partially block the pumped 
airflow more than if the same KAPs were suspended 
overhead. 

As a general rule, for shelters having more than 
about 20 occupants, provide one 3-ft air-distribution 

LUBRICATE NOTCH AND >j» ' 
PULLEY-CORD WITH GREASE,/\ 
VASELINE, OR EVEN A BAR / 
OF SOAP-TO PREVENT /■/ 
PULLEY-CORO FROM BEING 
BURNT BY FRICTION AND 
BROKEN. 

BEAT NOTCH OF 
GREEN FORK WITH 
HAMMER UNTIL 
BARK WILL PEEL 
OFF, LEAVING 
SMOOTH WOOO. 

Y*>._- PULLEY CORD 
NYuON CORD 

IMPROVISED "PULLEY" FROM A 
WIDE-ANGLED FORKED LIMB. 

. 

176 

BOTTOMS OF SAW 
CUTS ARE V2in. MT. 
APART 

AFTER SAWING, KNOCK OUT THIS MODIFIED "Vi,. 

2X4-in. BOARD 

"PULLEY" SUPPORT 
CORD OR WIRE 

ORNL OWG 71-7243 

ORNL OWG 72-6365A 

STOP-BLOCKS TO PREVENT HORIZONTAL 
MOVEMENT OF KAP. 

CUT SADDLE-LIKE NOTCH 
(BEST CUT WITH A ROUND 
FILE, OR A KNIFE, AND 
SANDED) 

LUBRICATE NOTCH AND 
PULLEY-CORD WITH GREASE, 
VASELINE, OR EVEN A BAR 
OF SOAP - TO PREVENT 
PULLEY-CORD FROM BEING 
BURNT BY FRICTION AND 
BROKEN. 

IMPROVISED "PULLEY" 

Fig. 

a comfortable hand-hold on which to pull down- 
ward, tie two or three overhand knots in a strip of 
cloth on the end of the pull-cord. 

(Such a "pulley" can also be used to operate a 
bail-bucket to remove water or wastes from some 
shelters, without anyone having to go outside.) 

E. Quick-Removal Brackets 

The air-supply KAP that pumps air through 
your shelter is best held in its pumping position by 
mounting it in homemade quick-removal brackets 
(see ) for the following reasons: 

© A KAP provided with quick-removal brackets 
can be taken down easily and kept out of the way of 
persons passing through its doorway when it is not in 
use. It can be kept in a place where people are unlikely 
to damage it. 

® By installing two sets of quick-removal brackets 
in opposite shelter openings, you can quickly reverse 
the direction in which the KAP pumps air, to take 

BOARD FORMING A 
2-in.-DEEP OPEN 
BRACKET, WITH AN 
APPROX. '/3J-in 
SHIM UNDER IT 

BOARD THE SAME 
THICKNESS AS THE 
"FIXED" SUPPORT 
BOARD OF THE KAP 

. Quick-removal bracket for KAP. 

advantage of changes in the direction of natural 
airflow through the shelter. 

« If the KAP is installed on quick-removal 
brackets, in an emergency a person standing beside 
the KAP could grasp its frame with both hands, lift it 
upward a few inches to detach it, and carry it out of 
the way—all in 3 to 5 seconds. Being able to move the 
KAP quickly could prevent blast winds from 
wrecking the pump, which might also be blown into 
your shelter—possibly injuring occupants. In exten- 
sive areas where fallout shelters and their occupants 
would survive the blast effects of typical large 
warheads, more than 4 seconds would elapse between 
the time shelter occupants would see the extremely 
bright light from the explosion and the arrival of a 
blast wave strong enough to wreck a KAP or other 
pumps left exposed in a ventilation opening. 

Note in that the KAP's "fixed" support- 
board (a 3!/2-in.-wide board to which its hinges are 
attached) is held in a bracket only 2 inches deep. To 
prevent too tight a fit in the bracket, be sure to place a 
'/32-in. shim or spacer (the cardboard back of a 
writing tablet will do) between two boards of the 
bracket, as illustrated. Also, make spaces about '/i6 
inches wide between the lower inner corners of the 
stop-blocks and the sides of the outer board. To 
prevent your hands from being cut, you should put 
tape over the exposed ends of wires near the frame's 
outer edges of a KAP that you want to be able to 
remove rapidly. 

In a small expedient shelter, a small KAP can be 
quickly jerked loose if its "fixed" support-board is 
attached to the roof with only a few small nails. 

VI. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

A. Pumping 

Operate your 3-foot KAP by pulling it with an 
easy, swinging motion of your arm. To pump the 
maximum volume of air, you should pull the KAP 
toward you until its frame swings out to an almost- 
horizontal position. Then quickly move your hand so 
that the pull-cord is kept slack during the entire, free- 
swinging return stroke. in Section VIII, 
LARGE KAPs, illustrates this necessary motion. 

Be sure to provide a comfortable hand-hold on 
the pull-cord (see ). Blisters can be serious 
under unsanitary conditions. 

To pull a KAP via an overhead pulley with 
minimum effort, sit down and pull as if you were 
tolling a bell—except that you should raise your hand 
quickly with the return stroke and keep it raised long 
enough so that the pull-cord remains slack during the 
entire return stroke. Or, if the pulley is not overhead, 
operate the KAP by swinging your extended arm 
back and forth from the shoulder. 

B. Placement to Take Advantage of the 
Natural Direction of Air Flow 

A KAP can pump more air into a shelter if it is 
installed so that it pumps air through the shelter in 
the direction in which the air naturally flows. Since 
this direction can be reversed by a wind change 
outdoors, it is desirable to provide a way to quickly 
remove your pump and reposition it so that air can be 
pumped in the opposite direction. This can be done in 
several ways, including making one set of quick- 
removal brackets for one air opening and a second set 
for the other. 

177 

C. Maintenance 

To operate your KAP efficiently, keep the flaps 
in good repair and make sure that there is the 
minimum practical area of open spaces in and around 
the KAP through which air can flow back around the 
pump frame, opposite to the pumped direction. So 
keep at least some extra flap material in your shelter, 
along with some extra tape and the few tools you may 
need to make repairs. 

VII. NARROW KAPs AND SMALL KAPs 

A. Narrow KAPs 

To swing efficiently in an entrance or emergency 
exit of an expedient trench shelter that is 22 in. wide, 
a KAP is best made 20 in. wide and 36 in. high. One of 
less height is not as efficient as a 36-in.-high model 
and has to be pulled uncomfortably fast. So, when 
ventilation openings can be selected or made at least 
38 in. high, make your pump 36 in. high. 

In a narrow trench shelter, it is best to have the 
pull-cord run the full length of the trench, along the 
trench wall that occupants will face when sitting. 
Then each occupant can take a turn pulling the pump 
without having to change seats. 

Good metal hinges on a narrow KAP allow it to 
swing properly if pulled with the pull-cord attached 
to one side of the frame. (Pumps with improvised 
hinges and large pumps must be pulled from a 
connection point on their center vertical brace to 
make them swing properly.) Therefore, if you have 
small metal hinges and need a KAP no wider than 20 
inches, build a rectangular frame without a vertical 
center brace. Make two pull-cord attachment points, 
one on each side of the frame and each 9 inches below 
the top of the frame. (For a small KAP, a satisfactory 
attachment point can readily be made by driving two 
nails so that their heads cross, and wiring them 
together.) Then if a change in wind direction outside 
causes the direction of natural air flow in the trench 
to become opposite to the direction in which air is 
being pumped, you can move your KAP to the 
opening at the other end of the trench, The pull-cord 
can easily be connected to the other side of the frame, 
and convenient pumping can be resumed quickly. 

178 

So that the horizontal support board can be 
nailed easily to the roofing poles or boards of an entry 
trench, it is best to use cabinet hinges. Screw them 
onto an edge of the support board, in the UNusual, 
OUT-OF-LINE POSITION shown in . This 
hinge connection allows the pump to swing a full 180 
degrees. To facilitate moving the horizontal support 
board, connect it to the roof with a few small nails, so 
that it can be pulled loose easily and quickly. 

ORNL-OWG 76-10358 

ROOF POLES 

HORIZONTAL 
SUPPORT BOARD 

Small, yet efficient KAPs can be made even if the 
only materials available are straight sticks about 1 '/4 
inches in diameter, strips of cloth to tie the frame 
together and to make the hinges and the pull cord, 
polyethylene film from large trash bags for the flaps, 
freezer or duct tape (or needle and thread) to make 
the flap hems, coat hanger wire or string for the pivot- 
wire, and string or ordinary thread for the flap-stops. 
A sharp knife is the only essential tool. 
shows a way to easily tie sticks securely together and 
to attach strings or threads for stop-flaps, when small 
nails and tacks are not available. The flap-stop 
strings or threads should be secured by wrapping 
them several times around each stick to which they 
are attached, so they will be gripped by the out-of-line 
knife cuts. 

ORNL-DWG 78-21897 

"U" NOTCH 

GROOVE 
(ONLY ON UPPER SIDE) 

. 

B. Small KAPs 

If the only available opening in which a KAP can 
be installed is small, build a KAP to fit it. Use 
narrower boards to make the frame and make the 
flaps of thinner material, such as the polyethylene of 
large plastic trash bags. For pumps 24 inches or less 
in height, make the finished flaps only 3 V2 inches 
wide and space their pivot-wires 3 inches apart. The 
flaps should overlap no more than V2 inch. A KAP 24 
inches high will pump enough outdoor air for only a 
few people, except in cold weather. 

. Sticks ready to be tied together to make 

a KAP frame. 

179 

To make a durable connection of the pull-cord 
to the center vertical brace: (1) Attach a wire loop 
() about 16'/2 in. below the hinge line. This 
loop can be made of coat hanger wire and should go 
around the center vertical brace. This fixed loop 
should be kept from slipping on the center brace by 
bending four 6-penny nails over it in front as 
illustrated, and two smaller nails in back. (2) Make a 
free-turning, triple-wire loop connected to the fixed 
loop. (3) Cover part of the free-turning loop with tape 
and tie the pull-cord to this loop. Tie the pull-cord 
tightly over the taped part. 

ORNL OWG 72-8204 

MAKE A 2-in. DIAMETER 
SNUG LOOP OF 3 TURNS 
OF COATHANGER WIRE. 

PRESSURE 
SENSITIVE 
CLOTH TAPE 

. 

VIII. LARGE KAPs 

A. Construction 

A 6-ft-high by 29-in.-wide model can be 
constructed in the same way as a 3-ft model—except 
that it should have both horizontal and vertical 
center braces (1 X 2-in. boards are best). To increase 
the strength of a 6-ft KAP, all parts of its double- 
thickness frame and its vertical center brace should 
be made of two thicknesses of 1 X 2-in. softwood 
boards, securely held together with clinched nails. 
Also, to increase the distance that the pump will 
swing back by itself during its return stroke, it is 
worthwhile to attach a 6-ft piece of 1 X 2-in. board 
(not illustrated) to the back of each side of the frame. 
Do NOT attach weights to the bottom of the frame; 
this would slow down the pumping rate. 

This 6-ft-high pump requires 18 flaps, each the 
same size as those of the 36-in.-high KAP. The flaps 
on the lower part of a large KAP must withstand hard 
use. If '/2-in.-wide strips of tape are attached along 
the bottom and side edges of these lower flaps, then 
even flaps made of ordinary 4-mil polyethylene will 
remain serviceable for over 1000 hours of pumping. 
However, the lower flaps of large KAPs can 
advantageously be made of 6-mil polyethylene. The 
width and spacing of all flaps should be the same as 
those of the 36-in.-high model. 

The pull-cord should be attached to the vertical 
center brace of a 6-ft KAP about I6V2 in. below the 
hinge line. A 3/i6-in. nylon cord is ideal. 

To adequately ventilate and cool very large and 
crowded shelters in buildings, mines, or caves, KAPs 
larger than 72 X 29 in. should be used. You can take 
better advantage of large doorways, elevator shaft 
openings, etc., by "tailor-making" each large air- 
supply KAP to the size of its opening—that is, by 
making it as large as is practical. The frame and brace 
members should be appropriately strengthened, and 
one or more "Y" bridles should be provided, as 
described in the section below. A 7-ft-high X 5'/2-ft- 
wide KAP, with a '/4-in.-diameter pull-cord attached 
18 in. below its hinge line, and with two "Y" bridles 
for its two operators, pumped air at the rate of over 
11,000 cubic ft per minute through a large basement 
shelter during tests. 

t 

180 

B. Operation of Larger KAPs 

A larger KAP can be pulled most easily by 
providing it with a "Y" bridle (see ) attached to 
the end of its pull-cord. 

3/l5-in NYLON CORD PREFERRED 

ORNL DWG 71-6069 

PULL-CORD 
TO PUMP 

^TO SECURE KNOT, SLIGHTLY MELT NYLON WITH MATCH. 

Y-BRIDLE FOR PULL-CORD ON KEARNY AIR PUMP. 

. Y-bridle for pull-cord on KAP. 

A man of average size and strength can operate a 
6 ft X 29 in. KAP by himself, pumping over 4000 
cubic feet per minute through a typical large shelter 
without working hard; tests have shown that he must 
deliver only about V20 of a horsepower. However, 
most people prefer to work in pairs when pulling a 
6-ft KAP equipped with a "Y" bridle, when pumping 
over 3000 cfm. 

To pump the maximum volume of air with 
minimum effort, study and follow the 
instructions given below for operating a large KAP. 

AT END OF ITS FORWARO SWING, PUMP 
SHOULD JUST TOUCH TIGHTENED 
PULL-CORD. 

ORNL D*'G 72-65Z6 

V 
\ 

\ 

/ 

KEEP PULL-COR0 SLACK DURING ALL 
OF FREE BACKSWING. 

. 

1. Gradually start the pump swinging back and 
forth, moving your arms and body as illustrated and 
pulling mostly with your legs and body. 

2. Stand at such a distance from the pump that 
you can pull the pump toward you until the forward- 
swinging pump just touches the tightly stretched pull- 
cord—and at such a distance that you can keep the 
pull-cord slack during the whole of the pump's free 
backswing. 

3. To be sure you do not reduce the amount of 
air pumped, rapidly move your arms forward as soon 
as the forward-swinging pump touches the tightened 
pull-cord. Hold your arms forward until the pump 
again starts to swing toward you. 

IX. SOLUTIONS TO SPECIAL PROBLEMS 

A. Increasing the Usefulness of Shelters 
by Supplying 40 cfm per Planned Occupant 

If a shelter is fully occupied for days during hot 
weather and is cooled both day and night by pumping 
through it and distributing at least 40 cubic feet per 
minute of outdoor air for each occupant—more than 
is required to maintain tolerable temperatures at 
night—these advantages result: 

© The shelter occupants will be exposed to 
effective temperatures less than 2° F higher than the 
current effective temperatures outdoors, and at night 
will get relief from extreme heat. 

• The floors, walls, etc. of a shelter so ventilated 
will be cooled at night to temperatures well below 
daytime temperatures. Therefore, during the day a 
considerable fraction of the occupants'body heat will 
flow into the floors, walls, and other parts of the 
shelter and less body heat will have to be carried out 
by the exhaust air during the hottest hours of the day. 
Thus daytime temperatures will be reduced. 

© Since the shelter occupants will be cooler and 
will sweat less, especially at night, they will need less 
water than they would require if the shelter were 
ventilated at a rate of less than 40 cfm per occupant. 
(If the outdoor air is very hot and desert-dry, it 
usually is better to supply less than 40 cfm per 
occupant during the hottest hours of the day.) 

© If the shelter were to be endangered by the entry 
of outside smoke, carbon monoxide or other 
poisonous gases, or heavy descending fallout under 
windy conditions, ventilation of the shelter could be 
temporarily restricted or stopped for a longer period 
than would be practical if the shelter itself were 
warmer at the beginning of such a crisis period. 

• The shelter could be occupied beyond its rated 
capacity without problems caused by overcrowding 
becoming as serious as would be the case if smaller- 
capacity air pumps were to be installed and used. 

LENGTH OF KEARNY PUMP+ 2 in 

181 

ORNL-OWG 66-12334R 

ALL UNUSED OPENINGS IN 
DOORWAY SHOULD BE COVERED 

B. Pre-Cooling Shelters 

If the shelter itself is cooler than the occupants, 
more of the body heat of occupants can flow into its 
cool walls, ceiling, and floor. Therefore, it would be 
advantageous to pre-cool a shelter that may soon be 
occupied, especially during hot weather. KAPs (or 
other air pumps or fans) can be used to pre-cool a 
shelter by forcing the maximum volume of cooling 
outdoor air through the shelter and by distributing it 
within the shelter. A shelter should be pre-cooled at 
all times when the air temperature outdoors is lower 
than the air temperature inside the shelter. Then, if 
the pre-cooled shelter is used, the occupants will be 
kept cooler at a given rate of ventilation than if the 
shelter had not been pre-cooled, because the air will 
not have to carry all of their body heat out of the 
shelter. 

C. Increasing the Effectiveness of a KAP 

If you want to increase the volume of air that a 
KAP with good metal hinges can force through a 
shelter, install side baffles (see ). Side baffles 
should be rigidly fixed to form two stationary 
"walls," one on each side of the swinging pump 
frame. They can be made of plywood, boards, doors, 
table tops, or even well-braced plastic. A space or 
clearance of V2 to 1 in. should be maintained between 
the inner side of each baffle and the outer side of the 
swinging frame. 

By installing side baffles you may be able to 
increase the volume of air your KAP will pump by as 
much as 20%, if it is in good repair and the openings 
around it are small. 

. Side baffles. 

D. Operating a KAP as an Exhaust Pump 

In some shelters, a KAP can be operated most 
effectively by using it as an exhaust pump. This can 
be done by pushing it with a push-pole attached to its 
center vertical brace. Push-pole operation is some- 
times the best way to "suck" outdoor air into a shelter 
by pumping air out of the shelter in the natural 
direction of air flow; for example, up an elevator 
shaft or up a stairwell. This method is especially 
useful in those basement shelters in which air-intake 
openings are impractical for installing KAPs. This 
would be the case if the air-intake openings are small, 
exposed windows or holes broken in the ceiling of a 
shelter in a building. 

To pump a large KAP most effectively with a 
push-pole, stand with your back to the KAP and 
grasp the push-pole with both hands. Using mostly 
your leg muscles, push the KAP by pulling the free 
end of its push-pole toward yoi'.. 

182 

 shows an improvised, flexible connec- 
tion of a push-pole attached to the center brace of a 
large KAP 28 in. from the top of its frame. 

<MNL-»wG «6-MZ332P 

CORD WITH ADJUSTABLE SLIPKNOT 
TO HOLD LEATHER TIGHTLY TO END 
OF PUSH-POLE . 

■PIECE OF LEATHER (FROM 
SHOE UPPER OR WIDE BELT) 

(NOTTED PERMANENT LOOP 
N END OF SAME CORD 

NYLON CORD HOLDING 
LEATHER TO CENTER 
BRACE 

TIGHTLY STAPLE OR NAIL^ 
TO CENTER BRACE - 

SHOWN AFTER 
TIGHTENING 
ONLY THIS KNOT ' 

9 FOOT LONG WOODEN POLE, 3/« . i'/a in. 
(WITH UPPER AND LOWER EDGES OF ITS 
END ROUNDEO). IS BEST FOR A 3-FOOT 
MODEL. (OR USE A l-in-DIA BAMBOO POLE K 

• STRONG STRINGS TIED TIGHTLY 
AROUND THE LEATHER lA^TER 
EVERYTHING ELSE HAS BEEN DONE) 

-CENTER BRACE OF 
KEARNY PUMP 

. Push-pole flexible connection. 

E. Ventilating a Shelter with 
Only One Opening 

Some basement rooms that may be used as 
shelters have only one opening, the doorway. A KAP 
can be used to ventilate such a shelter room if enough 
well-mixed and distributed air is moving just outside 
the doorway, or if air from outdoors can be pumped 
in by another KAP and made to flow in a hallway or 
room and pass just outside this doorway. 
indicates how to ventilate such a one-opening room 
by operating a 3-ft KAP as an air-intake pump in the 
upper part of the doorway. 

Below such a doorway KAP, a "divider" 6 ft to 
8 ft long can be installed. The divider permits exhaust 
air to flow out of the room without much of it being 
"sucked" back into the room by the KAP swinging 
above it. Plywood, reinforced heavy cardboard, or 
even well-braced plastic can be used to make a 
divider. It should be installed so that, in a possible 
emergency, it can be jerked out of the way in a few 
seconds. 

When used with a divider, a 36X29 in. KAP can 
pump almost 1000 cubic feet of air per minute into 
and out of such a shelter room. Although 1000 cubic 

feet of well-distributed air is sufficient for several 
times as many as 25 shelter occupants under most 
temperate climate conditions, it is enough for only 
about 25 people in a one-entry room under 
exceptionally severe heat-wave conditions. Further- 
more, to make it habitable for even 25 people under 
such conditions, the air in this room must be kept 
from rising more than 2°F above the temperature 
outdoors. This can be done using a second air-supply 
KAP to pump enough outdoor air through the 
building and in some cases also using air-distribution 
KAPs in spaces outside the one-entry room. The 
KAP in the doorway of a one-entry room should 
supply 40 cfm per occupant of this room. 

In order to prevent any of the used, warmed, 
exhaust air from the one-entry room from being 
"sucked" by the doorway KAP back into the room, a 
stiffened rectangular duct can be built so as to extend 
the exhaust-opening (in the lower part of the 
doorway) several feet outside the room. Such a duct 
can be built of plastic supported by a frame of small 
boards. It can be used to discharge the exhaust air far 
enough away from the KAP and "downstream" in the 
airflow outside the one-opening room so that no 
exhausted air can be "sucked" back into the room. 

183 

ORNL DWG 72-8203 

///;///;////////;/;/,■///;//////////'■/;////////////''''-''///'V//>''■■'> 

ty/////////////////////////////////////"/^//^//"//"////.' 2, 

. Use of a "divider" to ventilate a shelter with only one opening. 

F. Installing a KAP in a Steel-Framed Doorway 

If you need to install a KAP in a steel-framed 
doorway and it is not feasible to screw or otherwise 
permanently connect it to the doorway, you can 
attach the KAP by using a few boards and some cord, 
as illustrated by Figs. 28 and 29. The two horizontal 
boards shown extending across the doorway are 
squeezed tightly against the two sides of the wall in 
which the doorway is located by tightening two loops 
of cord, one near each side of the doorway. One loop 
is illustrated. A cord is first tightened around the two 
horizontal boards. Then the looped cord is further 
tightened by binding it in the center with another 
cord, as illustrated. 

Two large "C" clamps serve even better than two 
looped cords. However, secure support for a 
swinging KAP still requires the use of a vertical 
support board on each side of the doorway, as 
illustrated. 

ORNL OWG 72-6364 

CONCRETE 
WALL 

LOOPED CORD,TIGHTENED 
IN CENTER, HOLDING BOARDS 

TIGHT AGAINST 
DOOR FRAME 

FIXED HORIZONTAL 
SUPPORT OF KAP , OR 
BOARD SUPPORTING 
THE QUICK-REMOVAL 
BRACKETS FOR A KAP 

NOTCHED 1X4 in. SUPPORT 
BOARD EXTENDING DOWN 
TO FLOOR 

. 

H. Using Air Filters 

To supply shelter occupants with filtered air 
usually would be of much less importance to their 
survival and health than to provide them with 
adequate volumes of outdoor air to maintain 
tolerable temperatures. However, filtering the 
entering air could prove worthwhile, provided: 

© Your shelter is not in an area likely to be 
subjected to blast, or it is a blast shelter with blast 
doors and blast valves protecting everything inside. 

© Work on filters is started after you have 
completed more essential work, including the 
building of a high-protection-factor shelter, making, 
installing, and testing the necessary number of K APs, 
storing adequate water, making a homemade fallout 
meter, etc. 

© You have enough low-resistance filters (such as 
fiberglass dust filters used in furnaces and air- 
conditioners) and other materials for building the 
necessary large, supported filter in front of your 
KAP. 

® Your KAP can pump an adequate volume of air 
through the filter and shelter. 

© The filter is installed so that it can be easily 
removed if shelter temperatures rise too high. 

To prevent a filter used with a KAP from 
causing too great a reduction in the volume of air that 
the KAP can pump through your shelter, you must 
use large areas of low-resistance filter material. An 
example: In one ventilation test, a large basement 
shelter was used which had two ordinary doorways at 
its opposite ends. These served as its air-intake and its 
air-exhaust openings. A 72X*29 in. KAP operating in 
one doorway pumped almost 5000 cubic feet per 
minute through the shelter. But when a filter frame 
holding 26 square feet of l-in.-thick fiberglass dust 
filters was placed across the air-intake stairwell, the 
KAP could pump only about 3400 cfm through this 
filter and the shelter. 

 shows a quick-removal bracket 
supported by two horizontal boards tightened across 
the upper part of a doorway by looped cords, as 
described above. Also, study and its 
accompanying instructions. 

ORNL OWG 72-6617 

/LOOPED CORD.TICHTENED IN CENTER, 

HOLDING BOARDS TIGHT AGAINST STEEL 
DOOR FRAME. 

VERTICAL SUPPORT BOARD 
^V^nljjjic EXTENDING DOWN TO FLOOR 

QUICKLY REMOVABLE 
"FIXED" SUPPORT 
FOR KAP 

BOARD FORMING A 2-in-DEEP 
BRACKET, WITH AN APPROX. 
V,2-in. SHIM UNDER IT 

BOARD THE SAME THICKNESS 
AS THE "FIXED" SUPPORT 
BOARD OF THE KAP 

. 

G. Building More Durable KAPs 

If you are building KAPs in normal times, you 
may want to use materials that will make your pumps 
last longer, even though these materials are more 
difficult to obtain and are more expensive. 

Durability tests have shown that the KAP parts 
that wear out first are the flaps and the pulleys. In 6-ft 
KAPs, the lower flaps are subject to hard use. Lower 
flaps made of 6-oz (per sq. yd), clear, nylon- 
reinforced, plied vinyl have lasted undamaged for 
over 1000 hours of full-stroke pumping, without 
having their edges reinforced. Lower flaps made of 6- 
mil nylon-reinforced polyethylene, without edge 
reinforcements, have lasted for 1000 hours with only 
minor damage. 

The best pulley tested was a marine pulley such 
as that used on small sailboats, with a Delrin 
(DuPont) 2-in.-diameter wheel and 3/!6-in. stainless 
steel shaft. This pulley was undamaged after 
operating a 6-ft KAP for 324 hours. The pulley 
appeared to be good for hundreds of hours of further 
operation. , 

The best pulley-cords tested were of braided 

dacron or nylon. 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 1 

185 

o 
>- 

> 
< 

tn 

U 

fig 

Z 

5/1 

1 
i o 
o 

o 
X 
5 

a. 

3 •- 2 
° 'Z 3* 

JJ 2 S 

i^lil 

is /< 5 
0 «i Q U c 

J5 

O ' . 
•*■' B 
- O 
c S 

ü .s ■= 

3 fl o 
c. 

O i- 
ö ° 
a. <u 
a- 
S.-2JJ 
.o 
•°^ 
a" 5 
E 
3 «J 
o £ 
>. 
« 2P | 5 

£ fl 
o 
fl 3 
S fl 
a o u 

"E 
E >^ 
•3 Ä 

« " 
a. >> 
«§ 
M 
'■S « 
c -a ca u 
° is0! 
•S E° = S 
^s-o j, 
u <u - 5 

2 o S fl 

.£ ~ < tu § 
« B a ri -B 
ca ? 2: "j" o 
_ s 3 * S 
2s = s §- 
1 3* = -° 
•g wC£ a. 

fl 2 > B O 
5 3 O X 
O u -H- 

VI 

>,- £?~ fl -d 
u ,u ° E u O 
5 N O 1> 3 o 
.u<2 g « H 
fl _ <" 5 ° t 
1> E V- u on O 
«i •"" ca _o ^ o 

" 5 ° B fl -T- 
= « = .« g g 
£"£.255 
U=üfl-L_ 'fl=TJ 

u «^ 
£ ^ SO 
"1 2fl 
=°| 1 5 
•■s = fi se 

— ■£ f> < c < 
•s ta « «J -g u 

■s. E - fe 2 s 
o * « * T = 
° ca *■ G fl a 
g«°Z«z 
<u o <u ri i> u- 

^ O O 5 ° Ä 

e "" tfl ** 
- 3 .£ fl 
- O _. E 

C -w «<=• 

•a * s<i 13 
■S", ■*• c 

= «fc5 

•" t« o 5 
<i> O ^< 
a o 3 - 
. e ,r. o u 

2 o. 
«a 8 
o 2 o 
2AA 
u c 
t3 t> ca 
u <u 
«A V 
3 S E 
•O 3 — 
ecu 
« c ä 
- = s 
§» a. 
- S « . 
3 ° E -a 
u c o -c 
J5 S? c o 
•2 e O" 

* o-." '.2 
£ 2 2-a 

u a a ap 
fl CO 
58:8 
o § O u 

■•3«" 
I/] 3 E 00 

•Sg«S 
3- I-" 
- J « g 
.5 «*. x ,. 

1*« s ft o 
'*> u ** S 
■» J= <u — 
o.- 3 5 
B< o.2 
o . *" o 
« hfl s 
<U u u 
Ö o got« 

186 

tu 
D. 

ey 
to • 
3 a 

si 
.r! a a 

u — 
to I. 
Ü s 

C X 
« « 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 2 

ss x te CJ « 
° .— w2 "° 
»Jus« 
a ~ 3 E E 
2 «^ 23. 3 cy 

**» = £ 
Ä 2 fc a 
^. 3 ** D ffl 
* o ü g w 

•J ■" i «2 e» 
■- ij o « < 

•g «Ü «„ 
re *, o « a 
U C « D.T3 _ 
w
a

n
a

a

r
a
e
l

o
t

-
h
g
i
h

l
a
t
s
n
i

h
t
r

e 

5 2 c?2 
»•5 M« 
or!.E„ 
J£ « &■ 
< a- u, 

K o 
x 

P3 .. /n •*- 
ß W 1) 
r3 w u 
'to v c 
> a 
SSrg 
u* c a 
HO« 
to ^> CJ 
"« !s -2 
! S 
1) 

C c 01 U "O 
» «c § ° « 

E S 

0- . 
a to 
u • 
u "5 

••S OJ E «— ü 
<-> x — _ 
4) *■ u ~ 
°" Ü O fa 

= .33 fN cj 

B n T^ o 
_ 0) 
3 X 
r fc- w -*~ 
(^ x 
c 

CO OJ 
"' c 

s 
Eft 

*-> es 
5»»»» 
£■=2 5 

£ « K 
a to "re 

6»' 

'5 to c 
_re a c 

.5 cj or— ^ 

to o 
£> 
"5 
& 

™ re ■— re ^ 
3 __ 5- .to 
* e — 2 00 
v re ^ A .E 
c to **•'« 2 
>> Cy to 
- es _e O - 
O-OC O.X 

f>2< 

.S "S 
*■; J< 
tt> u 
CJ 3 
* •*? 
^ & x *•* 

'S 
4> 
Z 
U5 
o 
o 

B 
> 
e 
•1 

1 *• 

"3 
< 

e £ 
66 
85 
B 
E 
55 

ty 

IS 
ty 
H 

5 
e 

ts 

e 

a 

a 

ty ej 
OJ 

"33 

a 
£ 

CUD 
a 
'5 

-; D 5 
3 
O 
< 
•o u 
CO ,0 
u 
tu 
K 

c 

c 
'5b 
ty 
ä 

ty 

ty 

> 
c 
o 
*-*3 

ty 

OS 
c 
'i 
Jo c 
o 
c 
.2 
o 
ty 
ty 
(A 
ty 
in 

ß 

f 
tj 
to C 
tu 
o •o 

"5 
o 
•a 
c 
CO 

tu 
to 
E 

ty 

tu 
ty 
c 
tu 

tu 
Jß 
'u 
< 
ty 
t/5 
ty 
O 
O 
•o 
"re 
_u O re 
< 
2 
E 
re 
ty 
V) 
ty 
a re 
ty E 
H 0 

K 
tu X 

ty 

ty 

to 

•w ey oo u 
ty-5 =•£ 
00 « _ 
ty a a — 

S3 fa 
g? E 5-E 

" eö "> "O 

to T3 u 

ty 2 re 
£« ty E 
tw £ 

lg SS 
»"° K 
i- ty J2 
cy —; k> 
J>ä ~ £? f 

tn _ P « 
»*- ty £ -. 

« re ty ty « 

o to 

to s 
eJ-iS 
X o 

I« 
I"5 

60 e 
.E o 
w c 
ey ty 
5^ 3 
u « 

a *~ 
.£ e- 
tSÄ 
ü >. 

(8 w tyj •- « 
a c - w « 
E.s a o 
° SS "o « •■= 
. J1 « o o 
v u r fc m 
ty o o w 
n tu S tu 
S • "O f > 

c a £■ ~ 
ey E «i • -s 

<£ _ eo re E 
^•g re &3 
„CM .E 
> •= .- tu E 
5 s &*£ 5 
•*• o"C o "re 

tu 3 "O 
x K « 
C tuü 
o x a. 
»t I 
§ I s 
c E ^ 
° o "^ 
tu <— .t; 
tn a 2 
ty re re 
•£ u a 
^ tu 

S£x 
■S ~ 
o o « 
y r« fl) 

u2'ü 
> a: c 
•.'S 3 ey 

ir> 

o. .w 
OHü! 
J«< 
_} < ^ 

g^H 
J3 - W 

SOUD 
;Z^z 

= o|S 

> ^ 21 

<t^jS3< 

l~ tu 
ty c 

a o 
" re 
e 'S 
tu C 
C Cv . 
° ty £ 
>>" u 
a: E oo 
a re 
£ cu a 
£ -a « 
.o tu 
SJ » ~ 
X K 00 
•" o a 
"5 fc;5 

X -o tu 
H x 
•x E 
.2 E 
«si 
X o re 
«'-5 5 
a ^ x 
s|! 

3 

_cy 

Si 
on re 
X 
"H s 
u. 
E 
o 
u ■o 
u c 
ty o 

tO (/5 

a ey 
.2 s 

i- Ü 

to ty >, O ey ey _cy 
'u^'ü"*- ui^ rex 
ey '-j « a u. « 

<=.2|«SSaE^ 
•-1 ■*-* - /I u -r ü 
O r- 
■g.s 
> -o 
re "O 
— re a 
ä"« 

2 °2^ 
ao-0 __ re 
.E D c E 

oo?2(-3-(OfljXw-"0 5o 
EuuO,t)E„o~ ** 

o 

to a 

**- ey 5 
w *■ _ "' .a S ey — .— 
w J X„>— £ ü 3 c 
"5 o .s 
X x 

oo o 

loF'-..E>t;c TStujift 

te 

ü 

CSKCSUU 
« « -X Ti 'S h 00 
o 
A 2"°-o °> i ? — 3 
E' 
•o 
to ^ o. o -*j •>. 
E m 5 
CU O. t- 3 C 
re^ 8"° S » 
gxc 
55 "o )= > 
vS u re 
■o g-S ät2 b »■•§ 

ty StS 

cs .tS ey ■ 

"a a to _ 

3~^|||0 

■^ s) u ft 
ty ey ü 

ey 00 

w.StoS-o.Sa.rfx 

•■g " '5 ~ re 2 « ^ 
h x o £ x . x 
i x 
to tu - ' 
_ c c s2 "0 op 
2 ,o eu o 3 <SJ c 
- ° « > « 3 
o -a 
« S « 
!~ to Ü -S tö ey 

> ' 
ty 

H & 

' = u £ > t: x -o 
'•s?-g-o5SP2 

= -r to ey 
r' C 3 
■t cj o 

> b CJ 2 
00~ fc CJ 

- eya^^SPj-*^ 

w 

X c-x^;" eo * u J. ejj<2 

to 

g CJ x CJ CO 

« E , ^= = = £gxf« 

tu 
e 

^ « u y c a £r"r J "P is - 
3*;W = t- = r;C 

o 3 a a c « o 

2 -o 5 .E M 

o ■' 

■?« o 
~ X 'S 
a re 
eo to *3 "O 
z i I s 

2 OJ.5„ 
« 'S ES 
fc- aj UM 
•" 3 E s> 
eo ty B "" 
© re E « 

CJ SF- 2P 

CJ 
SS e 
««■" 
TJ.S ie 
re oj 

t< o 

ctt o 
: w 

Ä M 

2 *- tvO 3 
r:*0 ft t; 

S « c 5 o 
OJ _J-J X t~ 

3 13 "■ *" 2 
o c a u. u 
_. re i— ey i« 
[2B . S JS 
OJ to c c 
■oh «J 

00« 3= K 
C ui 3 4) 
» Jt J ^ » 
3 re e 
iS-S 
Be 
3 O 
to *^ 

t3 c ey 
c O K 
re •« ey 
eo_?J£ 
a X) t— *- « 
O re O _ey "O 
.2 « 
- x> ' 
SSI"»; 

a ey CJ CJ a 
— > to X „u 
a « on cy re 
ey X ™ > o 
t- -.« re 
T w "S X O 
3: | - *» 
_ CJ CJ T5 
O D.X c 
oj 
_ O '3 
to x O '3 re 
ü «* o) a 
5|xtS g 
^ E M| 2 j 
r" *" a *J 
>> re ey v 
V) 
a 13 13 u Q 
0 3 3-3^ 

»a 5 « 3 
«•2 >,<u £ 
2 to 05 2P a 
oo"ö • 

:3 TO -1- 
u2 ro 

O X 

3 TO c ° 
to 
p ty 

« to 
CJ — 
3 " .E fei - 

C -, oi — S 
ey 
top 
+j a w 
3fcS « 
O OJ 
-• S= cy E 
S £<Sx CJ 

'2 f 3 = § i 
e i? p g = fc 

^ « to 2 £ 
„So"« 
CJ x> C. — to 
x re cy cy o 
H «-J *o "o *o 

« j« a OJ 
cy — jz 
ty -5 ^ 
c « 
» M 
3 « cy © 
0 e.s "a 
— cy oo-~ 
1 cy « 5 
x oj .2 '£ 
a "2 "" « 
E « cy o 
« E u e 
I. »> _ OJ 
"2 x-o ^ 
3 «J „ 
re "a "o w 
10 3 OJ M 
«J 8 C* 
. _ to « 
2 — "3 § 
3 « +- "u 

o en 
*- oj re to 
« "S.« .5 
a E "« cy 
r «"5 8 

o 
2 >■, 
-'S« & 

to a re m 
*- 3 *c 
3 w « "O 
B «£ re 
.— pg ^-*. 

C — > -a 
re . © c 
5 6 ara 
« o « rf 

a ° 't > 
re "*" re « . 
oi — a u. 
" ^ a .2 Ü 
<£•? 2 tj-cj 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS. Page 3 

187 

0? b 
C o 

'si 

•— 15 
2 § 

'£. c 
.- o 

a T3 > 
'E 2 - 
a o 
c a * 
3 O 4> 
■a E ■■ 
41 Ä 
,— « c 
rts ^ 

Deo 

b ■= z 

3 « 
so 
-a -a 
« ■ — 
V) OS 

SO 

,- 4) 

O a 

o 

X 

•sJ ° 
_ "> u 
•a = x 
c Xl 
a a o 
2 tn ** 
3 4) w 
O "O 
>> 0) 
C/l J^ 
~ 41 
ö c c 
Eg. 
'■a « > 
•a = 2 

■H a. 5 
4) T3 lb 
a, c K> 
«i d* 
« ._ a 
•£ = 
5.a c 

■8 I 2 
5 3« 
CMC 
.22 « 7„ 
•— .— oo 
S >>.5 
r: « 3 
^ b u, 
- = M 
d U 4J 

£ § 
S: -a 
. i) 
u a; 

g.a 
c a 
.2 5 
a a >> 
^ 3 o 

~ u w 
5 a N 
N X 4) 

o § — 

- 3 "3 
' a 4) 4) 
- ■£ ^3 
5 ao'7' 
ao c u 
c 'S 5 
-co3 
« c c 
ü n. O 
^X - 
"> _ = 
IS" 
i£ 2 -° 
us 2 £ 
«'« £ 

vi c 
3 o 
•*~ V 
O N 
O 
o. 

C CJ 
335 

« * 5 
= > t3 -a o 

— i> 
c N 
— 41 
o •£ 

b CD 
.3 T3 
00 « 

3 -O 
<A 

4) u 

° 2 
2 o 
o 
ipe. 
O " « 
« b -£ 

eis 

0) 
x ao 
*" c 

C M rv 

S § 

=*-£ "5 

o Ja o 

£ o 2 

S «.2 
4j a 
x « 
— c 
-w c. 
a a 

3 c1 

.2 o 41 
.ts c c 
o.2 ° 
c- a o 
«Ü 

00 u "O 
•-! w »> 
S r, >• 
X 4J ci 
u£ > 
«1 ** ? 

o o 
S~ 
•3« 

« c 

•5 o 
eg O £ 

3^ 
* 3 
X 3 .* 
2 " « 
ooä s 

3 3 0 

a <^ Si 

|i| 

«-. 3 fc 
5 = o 

o£ « 

| «I 

•5 '3b_u 
»«"; 

HO o 
T3 X c 
U — 
- 3 Ü 
« o a 
*o a, 
3, ~" u 

C u 
1) T3 
3 u 
O.J3 

o oo 
S 5 
■c 
0) a 
« a» 
rs 

E 
3^ 

M o-.b 

_ «J 
u c « 

« <s » 
4) o 
<U 0) 
C x: 

.5 2 = 

n o 
« So 

J= « 
*^ h 
3 «» 
O * 

a i) o 
■a S.E 
2 J S111 •=§ s S J 

yj C 

f- o 

.-3 C 
4> 3 
■a c 

b ° 

■TS 
O 
3 
E 
S 

o 
■o 
c 
o 

0) 
X 

T3 
2 
'_a 

X 

>1 

41 
X 

ee «a 

< (3 t 5 
oezSs 
8§il 
O < O ä 
s«S 

a

Mis 

iu u- * S - 
to * 7 M 

9 Jo* 
< ^ * o 
H ? * «■ 

niAcooniAco 
O O O »- *- r- T- 
öddödoo 

to. 
SI 

•- w.« ■>? iß « r*. 
ödöödöö 

2 a 
15 

ic as ra to o « rv 
d d ^y N N w 

tq r- to CM P-- CJ 
■*- H ^ <o r> oi t^ 

UJ s 
3 w 
O 
0. 
X 
UJ 
Z < 
O 
-i < 
> 
s 
UJ 
H z 

41 
X 

3 

o 
c 

UJ 
S 
P 
z 
u.' 
u. 
5 

5 = 

S5 

a N a» «) p- is ri 
f-f «SCO« V 

£ E £ E g E E 
E E £ E E S E 

»" *™ »*■ 

41 4) 
X b 
4> 3 
O 
B 
Q. 
4) 
X 
b 
41 
4) 

o 

« 2 
•s S ^: 
c 2 
o 
Ü .2 ao x- 
5 
Ö .£ 
•o 
3 

c ^J 
41 •—. 

: 3 

41 ff 

•s« 
C^ 
41 41 

£ I 
0 ijj 
U ?! 
« E 
ü U 
2 « 
§ * 
— c 
a o 

a 
a 
^ 

41 
X 

M 
3 

a 
4) 

3 
a .. 

Mg 
s = 
Is- 

O 4) 

c c 

S 

■5Ö2 
4) x as 
■5 - 4) 
i u5 
o 
o 
c -a 

QD 
.5 L 
'en '"■ 
O 4) 
a. c 
x £ 
41 -5 

41 

ao 
3 

x o 
3 u 
« 41 
>>£ 
-0 T3 
- 3 
ao a 
.S u 
+_* J- 
— « 
3 g. 

o 

X Ä 
a _a 

i/3 -o 

«I 

ao b 
c u 
.S "i 
■■SI 41 
3 T3 

41 

ao 
41 
b 
a 

■s 
u. 

a 
41 

3 

3 2 
.2 x 

«la 
£5Ü 

< x. — 

.- X c 
a oj 

o > 

4) ü ü U) 

a ** 3 c 
-2 g 3 

Ul 41 b- b 
C JZ O 41 

.2 - - o 

u 

«r ox 

W -b 5 

•so, 

O ° 4) 
00 «y b O 
a oaa g 

-gJ-E 

•o 
4) ■; 
aog 
a 
x 
°x; 
4) o <*- 

41 

41 b ^ 
•a a x; 
a 4) o u- 

E ao« 
E us t 
a c '3 
oo u u 

S.a-d sj 
- 2 aoS 
s » t- 
u o 5 
4i t3 si S 

• 41 O 
i ao*" 
I b 

'x S 
' ., 41 

.3 W 

t|.§l 

"3 .= 3 
E 3 S 41 

'"'■a U .£ 
<A uj X X 
C >, ' 
.2 2 41.3 

~X'b 2 

S 2 I •§ • 

« — 13 5 
x: « JC 
X u 

r UJ3 o 
b-^25 

E_ >x 

° b _ u" 
c o "5 ao 
o _ '-r b 

3 M-r 
33jsif5 3s ?T 

|^H.EaX- 
>• o s b: * -j ■_. 

'S 4> o 'S 
a .- -b x 

ä^iJ Sx 
|x* 3 

•-H 

Ü <9 
ao 
« .« 
. 8 
4) S 

•5£ ao . 
t3 *" a b 

— u 

a *; 
4> O 

4> « b 

4» 
= x: 
3 41 
«I C 
4> '" 

oS 
f_, a 

— JS 
> 5 
o •> 
X b 
a « 

O 4) 
5fj 
4) C 
o 

°% 
« 
ao*; 
•a x: 
« ap 
t, a 
« S 

u 

41 H 
> 
o . 
y H 

Q. 

o 
u o 

ib 4) 
o >. 
c u 
O 4) 
"S c 
a o 
Sx 
O..S 
« ^ 

£5 > 
a 
T3 41 
a "™ 
22 
o u. 

Ü > 

UI 
« a 
t3 «l 
- u 
5 x:' 
o u 
« .<= 

« x ~ ?; 
,b fj o « H 
5 *" 3 e « 
o « 

41 
e 
o 

X! 
4) .tS 

axi 

° a" 
g'b 
a a 

u c 
4i a 
X "' 

41 

1.1° 

« -b x a 

o a, 
■a US 
g* 
™- (IS b b> 

« J5 

o .2 

a o 2 
= x c 

o 
E 
30 
3 

« 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page A 

188 

KS 00 

w « £ « 
<*> ** ■_ — 
- o y 

SJ'S »i 

a) 12 * 
a, »J •** 
v 
« 
0"R£ » 

0J l- o 

O 

< &.* c 

IA (DC 

> »r V „ 
-•H^i— 00 
S Cl O u 

5.%o 

■2 g a .s 
S 1) « 

S-- 

r u 'S 3 

QO a •Sg? 5 

& S 

M U «J c 
s •??"§ :H ^ 
•Z- V 3 00—" 

.Si U 3 H ™ 

« 5 s> = 
C £?« 

«2 
* 

CB 

k. u 4) 
•o o > 
u j; U 

J: ü v 

U 

o-2 
.- D 

•og 8 J2 
s s-t; „ 
to « V) O 

o 

V 0) o 
z 

oc-S 
c 
»'S 

IJ5S.SS i 

s p u ° 
E §£•£ 
l~ (- — 

^ S 'S 
fc. o ° 

u 

eoo,u w 

w -r: o 
o '" .=> 

B « 5 l, 
o 1^.D.;- 
> — s 

t/i 

U g C « 
E" »MS 
5 u " i- O 
5 so« i) 
E T: -C T. -=■ 

6<> £ 

«CO 

U 

rt 
>, 
3 
O 

C8 

-K: 
O 
o 
'— 
s 
ti, 
^ 

w 
>, 
JD 

0) 
•c 
« 
c 
o 
o 

•o 
0) 
's 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 5 

189 

. 2V2-in. ADJUSTMENT THREAD 

(NYLON IS BEST) 

ORNL-OWG 73-MS88R 

TOGGLE 
TIED TO 
THREAO AND 
TAPED SECURE 
(SEE DETAIL) 

■ INSIDE DIAM 2 '/,, in. ■ 

■■■■'■• 

onrx^ 

x: BOTTOM OF CAN 

(This is not a Full Scalt Orowing). 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 6 

190 

4> e S ,T- £ * O S •- S P""" . . .= 4) F, - . n -V 
>=£ -^ *2 S •£ 5 EPS - A « B TS ^o s 

o a c^ u » te"B^"w>2 S £ 2 ^ * •§ « £ 
♦■s. .S -s <u-s ° u £c £ 73 «- u y a E a ■?, 

g»«S * U* S.JJ ?=-g|t J. £ £ cü N 
Jes. £ a « v « »«Sj'Sf 'S au« « £ £ " 
~ s u ., ? s >- * s g;t; " 8> JS 3 'S "5 B g <~ IS 
y
a
m

4> ; wu w i? J3 fe > ■ ^3 ä ._ 5 a So 
s .- jj- ._._ j. <u w-._ y a C c 5T 
Si, C •= > C -V" T> 

h
c
i
w

B *> w «.V 
S5Ü £° 

s
a

t
r
a
p

p

t
n

i
r
t
s

,
s

l
c
u
s

»-> flj Wi 
o

p
t
u
a
p
o
= 2 "O 
- s s c 
a*" Si 
eg 4> ** ■" 
•o h - *- 
£ e *> 
O J3 .5 JB 
•■5 £ tg.fi 
a
l
p

f
o

r

l
l
a
m

d
e
s
o
p
x
e

s

t
n
e
r
a
p

s
e
:
c
e
i
p

s

o
s
I

u 

d

.
t
i

e
t
,

,
l
i
a
n

s
g
a
b

«.■so D 
t-, 
BO 
t
n
E 
e
'5b u 
h
w
B3äS3 u 
öS!* 
4> 
£ 
Sago 
t» o 
WS Ü6 b 

B 

3 73 « -a o > -o E 

K S Kc.E « s ^ ec 

£•-■£ .ES ->, = £CS° .5 JU°~ * St ■£ 
H |S -E.S ^.E|^g» ^ "g OB 'S £?- S irij | 
ö^.5 1^ . -t=5l? I x Ä 7l|K-B s SÄ 2-S 
-tS »2-S ^Igst 8 S " s". "B fZ 
&Ji c s « «WE=£° « 5 *- S -° -« £ •*« s 

3 

O 
a 
* I- I '■= a c . J= ?; •* - «5 >> S3 c,^B = « « •-« Si2 
ES «« « ä g <u - o .a ■£ BS S ^ , <^OrJ o ^x; cw 
's» !8?Hi2*e»*|8ö® S ■« r- £-E JE 
■T.S «Hr,'°l=5 Q 73 5 & « ^ e,/5 &» 
« A 
« c«-2 « w 'ob -5b-Ä«>Ä ■ on *■ *. PT; O « « 

2 B ^ wf-2&.S.E Q<<EC-£ "■- U»s UO 

o ° ... 

M 

Ü O 

•o«oe ! 73 £. (u c >> .73^c Z"B S 7A 

CL 

= g«S^« ^av«" g >,! » g 1«23 v. - 2«^ £^75 
I ~^B=-§ 2 2.2J = t£"p| Ji^^l- SS -US SS E 

g^ -£,S^ ^g-E-g |S g^J= Ä-.1& §--_ J- 1 <i i 
(j ..£ = « S3 ä ^ PH £ UC3T;'« SU^ CU-S a^ -a« (5 
r. "S «l2"Xi> -E = B S3 •= *, "B £ UBT'« iSu^ cu-S s ^ -o «3 
g!2 S g g-ü S C: ■ g 73 "K «a 3u<^-; J! ft'~ , >» B3 O-^: ^C 
B«. ^.wu^g^. k E * w Tjc 5 8 5 . *< u - MMu So K- SE a, 
j. u. o « o.£ g^ £M-V. "-£ -0 S ! ^ g3«o. cw ■> 
fS »S^-Cg B"'^° ^f ic *-"§-£ |-°Äg |~| 

1 |3 ^SS.I-S.1 73l°l2 *l Äilll |-gl Hi *| If •§■!■ 1 

|3 ^SS.I-S.1 73l°l2 *l Äilll |-gl Sl-a 

•o 
I Si filial g-TillS J"« 1 = 1 »g oi^l |S-| 51 -g || g 
c S £&McÄ° N ^ ?" - « •§, 4. - g -s- S *T ■ JS* L,-"2 .£&• - w f- 

«E.2C£ 3-»i g « .E£ 8 f. SS* 5 *^^ g-^* " c ' « S S 

c 
4) 

B 

c 
CSB^-S .§vS5 ^« ^Ä.^^= IPS11 Ll?« :3 -p* -2'^ Ä 
£.1 Ü§SS>>Ä ,Il5?5 o* Tif-Si: !S^S«-H- ^g.fe ,-£ 2^ ■ 8 & 2 1 
.s _ .S1 0 „ >."J .5 •= r-, > = o - oc— - ce 5C«BO- o.e.« ijC So KS-5 -S 
» 5-=g^-°.S EgQg* «"g =BSä~ l=ö,*5 f«S. 8u £[2 g« * 5 
= -=«-1^ IcItB ^ S'^S-I o«Sj^ l&S-sl *ij gg 2 g 
Ml§Sb 13="! =5« I.IS5.2 8l^g= ^H <s |.| ^ ?d i 

I^Uli ä<1E5 ö« IB^ÖI- <S2ot S^I of Ü.E O: <5 H 

< 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oo 
■ e 

a 

O 41 
as a 

£ 3 

•3 5 
. a 

> .2 
CS u 
u 
X 
H 

4) VI 
■S 4) 
»> X 
CS 4) 
O..S 

.S CS 
•a j) 

V» 
CS 4) 
X-0 

äs 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 7 

" <" b 
s « o 
° u e 
u .3 ca 
.oca 
MEXO 3 
<U g b S o 
- ^S s 
'S ^tS. 

*- •o iS b 

«J 00 — 
■s X u Ü 
o 
E 
o 
s 

i- « o 

"« I S H 
fj «s s 2 o 

!-* 

■c 12 -a a 

BOO 
.2-°« 
' c 
a ■ 
N o 
e •* 
o « 8 
.» IN 
■« -o tS 
•- >> 2 X JS 
' e 3, 
._ « 
■a 
vi ^-* "O 
B ■— ** 
.= a cs 
o o 
.- OOJS> 
K S3 

S a * 
-•s = 
.s>~ s 

1SJ2 So 
S 13 >> 
u u 3 
ä S B 
«^ 
.2 ° 
.2 jj-S 
■S-se 
** K>3 . 
ü o a, u 

5 -M wc 
2 JS £ s 
2 M S 

b c * o 
>> 4> 
Xl « 

8.315 
a, u £ z 

c «-a 
§ = " 
.- ao" 

0 « o 
a i- c 
— u e 
es o 

u <u u 
>>xi oo 
•o .t: a 
J«t XI XI 
S - H 
■d & '5 
E 2 
4) IN -O 
c a -w 
T3 
<D •—' o 
c 
J= b e 
51 2 H £ B c 

<u ■- ■ 
U 4N 

'Car, 's 
•S s>.2 — -° (? 
« b 
3 K> 
e rt 
C * 
!9 0) 
5 ° 
x 

O g 

8.« 
n 5 
-1 

&_§■£ ex 
cs x: 
u u 3 
•a - 
c 
cs 
o 
■o 
c 

2 b 

c a -S ' 

s 
i) 
so 
<s 
00 
c 

•O 
o 

s 
b 

13 13 

»* w <S a a s _ 

üi O -T3 

E- 
.5 «") 
O J3 
a, c 
ev- 
es oo 

« t, 2 

w "■-MO 
a?? " 
<U « .3 XI 

JS 1) <u 

(1 B S 

EU 

a, 
oo -S« 

" u J< ,S 13 

5 5 3 & a 
<« w C "O •— 
"öS 
2£g 
g "" « « 
o 
" w ». 
O ü ä 

a « 
(U .5 i; 

o £ xi 
° * = 
U > 0) 

> 0) *5 
w 
« r; <*? 
-w a 

CS u w 

X ~ 
D 's 

C _ 
as 

Z 1 « 

53 -O 
00 JS 

CS o 

o 

O..S -o 
u • u 
D ,T «1 
.* n 3 

ooS 
00 

Wl V _. 
U Xi « 
00 fj * » 
« .2 oo " 
ap-5 c 
.5 o 

OO7' 3 IN U 

2*4) 
U ts J3 

£-5 
- ™ & S t! T3 
« 3 E § IS g 
"3^- £••= = 
C *N «5 Ä I- 3 
B a S °*0 ^ 
•2 T3 ■ft_2 • «• 
- B i?fj C O 
C CS J9 4N « ** 
i <« » « c-"« 
Pi i — *r* -** 
>, 3 'S » B « 
B . ■"• 2 
ao «J 
« B "N C-ö 
^"o 1> 3 1) B 
a isi-ss 

4) 
x 

4) 4) 
00 O 

- s 
ooo 
B VI 

;-B 

4) 4) 

oo 
B 
"& 

4) 

X 
B 
CS 
4) 
■M 
CS 

O U 

41 
■c > 
4> 4) 
3 
x-a X 
* 2P 
4) 
°r« X 
•- 00 
•o 
u 3 
s 
3 o 

u 
cs 

U [Li 

as 
.s« 
■2 4> 
C J3 
o — 

U) 3 
. O 
4) ■ 
Of» ^ 

CO 
" cs0 

E 4. 
O 4J 
C J3 . 
'<? 
.S =15 
«ifj 3 
U 00-° 
•S 6 4) 
B -2 'S 
*— « C*N 
>0 cs O 

3.3>1) 
w IN •-■ 
2 O 4) 
V) 4) 
cs H fj 
■° . B 
•2 if. « 
-C oo^: 
cfl cs *5 
«JS u 
O.T3 Ü 
O cs cs 
i 4) 4) 
,> l* l* 
H x oo 

4) 
4) 
X 

CS 
o 
JSl 

"cs 

4) 
S 
o 

Is 

x ■« 
00 D. 
•■B 4) 
u 4) 

n 2 
■c 'S 
°x 
S S 
M S 
IN — 
CS IN 
•A 4) 
B £ 

« 5 
s-S 

3 4) 
o'-a 
—1 •« 
2 js 

f" cs 

Ä O 
«3 <4N 

•5U 
JS CS 
S E 
la 
§"8 
a « 
IS 
1-° 
B! »r i 
CB U 
3 J3 o 

ON 

8 
CS 

4) 
Ja! 
E 
o 

O0 
o 
B 
4) 
( 

•o 
s 
cs 
X 
14 

X 
X 
3 
u 

B°« 
o .£ 

c ~ . 
4) *N 4) 
00— > 
fl B1'5 
cs u 

a1 »'S 
■r a 
&-.S 

X o 
— 3 

CS HN 
NN 
JS .OON- 
3 2 a 
S 4> 

.5 a 
•O vl 
u >, C 
o x u 

'S S- ON 

CS 3 ^ 

Ou 
4) 

to cs 
Ü 8 
cs X 
™ J2 
'■«3 ™"" 
u S 
°» S 
4) O 
*-* 
2 .a 
!S J3 
«. fl 
«» a 

4) -Ö 

ä J= °o 
s 

cs o 

fl o 
x S^a 
•? o P..S 
5« OO 
«N n 
ÜJS oo 
's = E 

4) 

H gx 

o .00 

B M^ 
cs Vl cS 

O v} 

w 4> 
.SN (IN 

■^ « 00 
*N •" C 

-2 g-3 
«1 2 
•a . S 
s 
4) 4) 
oo XI 
cs — 
w 00 « 

^v^3 X > 

—^ B >» 4) 
h ON!H 
■s = ss*8 
3 *S 

3 aoj? E 

«5 > b 

« cstrf- 
« Sa a °B 
X 4) oo"3 
41 J< ■ 
.5 J 
a.*- 
4) C 

^J- 
4) 
s 

.2£ X * 
S . 
B "° 
.3 4) 
. w) 
3 

Z 1> 
J= S 
oo 5 

00 4> 
S X 
S - 

4) 
«I" « C 
o — 5 

S •- •£ s 4) 
C IN ^ '— IN 

B 

•a E 

li 

O 3 £ «J £ 
oo«: cs 

41 

2 4> 

VI = 
N, J= 

b T3 

191 

3 
O 
XI 
41 
B 
O 

41 c o 

X 
s 

a 

00 

o 
X 

4) 

IS 
4) 

4) 
X 

x 
CJ 
CS 
4) 

a 
T3 
s 
CS 

cs 
XI 

O 
o 

*> b 
4) *- 
"S.5 . 

2 oo 4> E 

,2 ® w S 
!/5 «1 CS X 

•U 4) a. 

9> - — 
3 —: cs 

«2 5 

cs 
4) 
33 

00 
e 
o 

fN 
s 

•o 
1 s- 
ao-c 
c w 
^ ! 

cU 0) 
«5 t3 
ops 
CS =J 

«as 
Ü vi JB 

4) 

S 
2 

00 
s 
a 

«N 
CS 
"O 
£ S 
•O IN 
S 4) 

11J 

Sej: 
g" 4) 4) 
« 'S .S 
v. I S 

■SJN 

a: j 4) 

«5 VS 

EH 
OJ 

cr-5 — 
7 • - <N 
h 4. 5C 
•3 ,4) <- 
E EM 
t/1 
4) 
« 
Ü 4) S 3 
S3 b on Z s»2 ea 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 8 

192 

Ü- S B «8 k, 

^. — 4) — 
W i« — © m 

3 C 

4> 

U* u m B ™ w 
5 "O M -E 'S 
e 'K <U & « 
Z „** "2 -2 
p 2 o '5 »- £ 
O * u ° r 
g 4> WÄ 60S 

<c.g S^*^ 

^ 5 ° t3 u 15 
2 S •- •£ e <3 
^ eeo^- £ | 

2. T ™ « B a — 
K o * w g 0..-S 
ra «is 
h"3 M~ 
o 

S £ '■= E 'S * 
< 3 u « a) a. E 
^ o Q> » i: cu-r- 
22 <" tl £"' 
^ B B 

S C 
-S*"5 eo g 
3 B p 4) ■" C 
■- «a S Ex* 

ä o ,„ B _ o .ü .S 

3 & c' S.* 
2*x> = 

4) B .3 •" 
> « 4- K 

u £ ° = 
_ Xa'ü 

— o m i) 
£ tfl B w 

T3 "O 
S « 
- t 
8*6 
«3 V 

« 3 
C .5 
O e 
u C 

.S3 
.'S 3 
ra _ 
i- 3 

u. .S 
O J^ 
w 2 
.S,c 

"Ob"! 

s 
.s » 
« «» 
u _ 
x: "O 
u ü 
'S « 
B O 

8 S 
rs ° - 

4> X 

E o 
3 
u B 
■o 9) 
C je 
B B 
T3 £ 
,o 

u >- • 
3 V V 

4» »T-J 2j?l 
x c 
00- B 
3 — 'S 
o s o 
3 O _n 

"5" S 
o _ * 

4> 

s E 
.«? a 

c " 

3 « 

3-gtJ 
19 S £ 
4) 
5 
XI u. 
<- o 
iß 
Cfl 
4) E 
CMS 

u 

Jä -< "S ** _« « JC 

«'S SS M-gÄ« 
_ k, "x: *- SJ -B 
5 u u. u - «) — 
»IS 
O u 

o S _ 

B u 

? » E g S g ° 

B C - _ 

DO,*- 
JC B W >-. 
5 "" B 

" §§-a 
. w rj b> 
- 2P a e SP£ s 
•g .5 o£.E^w 
* > D.-1 So s 
C 3 . _ 
B 2 -Ü 5 3 - 
g B O „ V 

0) 

"O fci 1) B 
n w ■" 

§ S S"5 
cgtM v c 
*■ 3 fl 
4) ««- U 

■8S« 
^ 2 .t^ 
B O 
ft X 60 
g at e 

o S u 
v rt ^ 

* c «J -= 
..— = ^ 
13 60 - a 
V) *£! "" 

3 S xi 
■g c ^ 
Jj E . 
" >> c 
^=5 >,!ö .a 

a> w c 

> 4) » S 
o jrf <«. .E 
V « o 
SEc» 
o» -, * .5 
B U O *; 
D.XJ JJ = 

_J) B o 
•a u a 
2 CK . 
O.SJ 2P-« 
*" c o 
V _ 
„Jo" 

B 
_ _ E 
x 
'5 

B a 

7 O 3 X! 
4) B 
> O M 
o»h a 

X 4) 
(U »— 4) 

B 

.2 3.3 = ] 
e k. "> 2 > 2 w 
B 0) g B S* 
8 o &5 go 

BS £ B 
u >^ w w 
V ?•= "O 
•= f is 
^J (n k. B 
-n B B g 

O B SCX« « 

O S2 S o 

O cj w 

00 'S g C DO § g, 
g -s 1 S .5 is B 
B X! C -- rv 
«- M n s c "2 
« | " O _g 3 
r- ^ "C -i- ■° C w 
5r u a b •- u S 
u s 3 « C - K 
■ t$ *3 J£. C O ra « 
O f er D-Ä o F^ 
;» £a^ 
■5 s 
.11 Ja '-g 5 

•ssJ!* 
•= "Ä 3 
§ V « | 
•C-C-B S 
c « 
O 3 
8 3 
a 
4) O 
4J S" > £ 
Oca« 

*S B ' 

4) • 

4) ~ 

S..S' 
c 
« 2 
"S « 
4) ~ 
•O X 
B 60 
3 g 

is a 
on« 
3 ~ 

E.S 

C u 
O Ct 

o-.y, 

V > o u 
■o c 
B 

4) 
60 
•O 
4> 
3 u . 

♦i B 
Xj 4) 
O S 
i'S 

x s> 
4> Xj 
Z O 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 9 

193 

.3 Nil ONOIV mo 

NVO JO VVV3S 3<3IS 

■,3NI1 QN01V1D0 

NVO JO WV3S 3C3IS 

in 
CC 
lil 
I 
00 

111 > 
< 

2 
3 
Z 

2 
3 

-I < 

O 
I 
oo a 
< 
UJ 

z 
H 
Z 
ui 

1- 
00 
UJ 
H 

X 
UJ 
-1 
3 
OC 

CC o 

u. 

•j 

o 
•J 
Ul 
50 

5 
u. 
O 
a. e 

u. 
O 
a. 
O 

< 
UJ 
oo 

\A aanoas aadvi 

IIONSdHONI-l 

UJ 
EC 
UJ 
I 
00 
UJ > 
< 
UJ _! 
s 

Z 
1 
3 
-I < 
z 
a 
-i o 
i 
00 
< 
UJ 
DC 
I 

Z 
UJ 

1- 
00 
UJ 
oc 
cc 
UJ 
-I 
3 
X 
x 
o 

< o 

< 
a. UJ 
o «" 
I- I 

Uj 
o 
oa 

O 

5- 
I 

O 
CO 

Uj 
o 
00 

s 
u. 
o 
§ 
o 
>-. 
o 
00 

■ 3Nil U31N3D - 

3uno3sa3dvi 
1ION3dHONI-l 

■3NI1831N30- 

Z 
< 

o 
I- 
> 
_l 
UJ 
CC 
z> 
o 
LU 
CO 

LU a. 
< 

<r 
O 
LU 
D 
_l 
a 

< 

LL 

LL 

< 
cc ui 
o a 
LL CC 
< 
-J 
o 
o 
1- 
LU 
CO 

LU 
N 
co 
H o 
< 
X 
LU 

LU 
I 
I- 
co 
I 
o 
I 

CO 
z 
cc 
LU 
H- 
h- 
< 
D. 

4 
oo 
Ui 
5 

Q 
5j 
o 

Uj 
I- 

Ü 

« Q 
3 oc 

OC 2 «a 
$955 
O < a« 
a "J ? 9 
OC S i 

"•**£: 

Q. 0Cu.| 
co «2 

Uj Ul 

UJ 

si 2£ 
< i* 
I- Q <t 

< 
UJ i UJ 
-i <r o oc 
jfO O H X 

niaoortino 
o o © «•". «"; «7 *■; 
o o ö ö ö ö o 

«- «N co *r in co r>» 
ddddood 

«f oo «v! <e o oo r» 
d d »^ «- w CN fsi 

-K 
Sii 
«- oc 
5« 
Si 
2S 
zee 
15 
sr cc 

UJ 
OC 
3 
00 
O 
a. 
X 
UJ 

Z < 

u. 
O 

j < 
> 
oc 
UJ 
1- 
Z 

z ec 

i- oc 

«- cö ^ d p» d «- 

UJ 
S 

tie: 
LU £ 
col 
no ec 

CN 
CO CM o> 1ft r- r> CO 

z 
* 
LL 
u. 
5 

d co 
< a 

£ E £ E E E E 
E E E E E E E 
CM * CO 00 O CM ^ 
f— r- t— 

^ 

2 

>J 

5 u. 

dOiMOiaaNi 8/s-i 
39 CnnOHS S3"IOH 

H^JJ, 

« ^ o 
0 O H 
1 U. 00 

NVO JO nV3S 3QIS 
3NII ONOIV mo 

< 
UJ i UJ 
-J cc § oc 
l^-O OKI 
IV I a. oo l- 

-¥ 

ce* 

«- K 
Iff 
SX 
»K 
z cc 

•»OS 

M CO 00 O CO LO 00 
O O O »" ^ ^" ^~ 
ööciöci do 

«- CM CO ^ US CO P» 
d ö ö ö ö ö ö 

■9; 00 M <e p CO !>; 
d d «" «- CM CM oi 

-r LU 

LU LL 

° E < »- 

Q 
z 
o 
cc 
— co 
< E _ 
LU 
CL LU Q. 
< I- o 
CC I- CJ 
5 £ x 
O m O 
»- CO <= 
Z UJ UJ 
£ i x 
LU I- .. 

z s CO *- <0 «N P<; «N 

<- co ■«? d f^ e> 5- 

< OR 

Ui . 
oc a 
3 oc 

Ui to 

cc 
z 

CO 
UJ 

Sin 

o<o« 
a UJ ,t a 
° OC S i 

LU 
DC 
3 
CO 
O 
a. 
X 
LU 
z 
< 
LL 
O 

< 
> 
ec 
LU 
H 
2 

UK«: 
UJ U. o» ° 
co ui 2 
3 y« 
Ui Ui 

03 < 

£ 

2 
~J s u. 

LU 
S 

LU £ 
«0 I 
in oc 

d eO öS :« «^ .^ P5 
«- v" cN M f» *? 

Z 
• 

LL 
LL 

5 

a co < a 

LU z 
c - 

E E E E E L £ 
E E E E £ E £ 
CM »* CO 00 O CN «* 
^* r- r" 

d01MOn39NI 8/9-1 
39 CnnOHS S310H 

^ 

a 
< 
LU i LU 
-J OC o oc 
OOhl 
Z u. oo h- 

NVO JO WV3S 3QIS 
3NII ONOIV mo 

< 

LU 

< 
a. 
z 
cc 
LU 
h- 
1- 
< 
Q. 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 10 

194 

B « 

w 5 B *J ._ ^_ 
r^rj 9£ B *• j) 0 
• i£ o « £ c ^~ 

u 

>,oo r 4 

v S^Z 

B f- X! B 
>-, o v H "7! ?P 
«fi- 9 SN B^ 
B 
E 
.«-g « 2 >,* B w 
w rn w *> o 
ux;£' 
•rt .> <5 •- "S SJ r= Ä 
"O U B 
o .S . * 

s ".*£ 

w 3 O, 

. c ^! w 
^ 8-s ^^ 
2 ~ <" 
Sj S &, « 
o 'x in o 
o — « 
1" i^i £ at; 

II c 
ll • 

WJ fli tn fll •** f»1 

M . u w «•£ E 

Ifi 
c _ 
*^- B — B er w <■ 
'i ° 
= £ Si ^"*:£t< 

LU C > 

I- w O O w 

75» 
00 Wg 

4> v 

u* aj 
O — 

K g eo .« > 

£ z "5 
>,£ w 
XI B 
S-B 
> " z 

Efc 
x 00 

•s" 
*o 
21 
—' 3 
« 
= 13 
4) 
o X 

MOU, g 
c 
--Lü 
B »"TO) 

.

4> 
 c X 
m
e
h

Ois 

g *- is "c 
■a S.S2 K 

BÜ g 
o. c 
« 
D . 
5 = 

a Z OD-3 as 
ä "O W c o 
w u S« 'a. 
JO £ .!£ -6 
« 5 „^5«J 
.•o £ —' B 

■S ~ o. 8 ^ 2 
2 w = ■£ = = 
X ~:~ >>C u, 
~ ■&,ü B 

* o Z « eo 5 
£ « 3 £ 3 -a 

"HB 
2 t> fl 
£5« 
„ .K 
13 M B 
B C B 

-_ O 
4> B •" 
X° » 
Ü E « 

"£ E « 
g
m
i
a
u
r
l
t
a
s

E
N
I
L

>^ 03 

B "C *-> '"^ rj flJlT] 
B 1/1 a) !*j 

E »> ~ x: . « 
B 1. 
>..2.E 
& B O C V- >>UJ 
"E.E 
S S 2 &<^ g ^r a 
. to 
- - .. . « z 
■fr^-sÄ B- -~ 
O l> B r* £ - £ Ü 

« u 4) £ -^ M 
o.? = .E 
g o .a s.s 5--B 
KM CLR Id » 3 

Q0-3 4> 
B °"X 
PM 00 ** 
E 4) 2 
S£ g 

^ x 5 
E fa C 
■- 4) ,- 

O « 41 ilj 

a & 

B -a 
O B 

E _ 

E 
3 

es S 
!§• 

1 
_3 
"« . 
^8 
v> X 

^Z 

a = 

-i" B 
Q u 

JS 00 u 

;S <S 4> 4) 
5 ° x x 

«<- D — *< 

E-o1* © 

III! 
x>fJ „ I 
?•«»£ 
00 fi 1 $ 

4) ^ ^" s^ 

E 
a o 

4' 

B 4> 
X X 

& 
o 

W 
ZQ 
U 

O 4) 
< b « 

UJ 
<^-x- 
1=^ 

-J V 

B< 
3 B- 

WS 

z-- 
t= x 

B B 
4> 
S 4) 
O B 
B J= 
= ^E2 
w 4) 

<J B 
D 41 

B . oca 

•B B- 
t/} B 

z^^ul 

4> -c — tu = 
x J 0.=: X 
" «-06 55 " 
■o u S — 
■5 U 1) Z c 
acS fi u. so 

(N 4> X 
u +* 
>> B -r 
"3 4> ^ 
B «'S 
§ » X 
'g-o « 

«B£ 
^ o a 
IS 8.= 
x " E 
x2 
i2 - B 
4> *« i^ 
4> O X> 

80« 
x z 2 
x^ a E 
B.= oo 
00 B.E 
E x ~a 

4. g£ 
-« e -a 
n {0 h 
E aox 
e 
o E *" 3 
«•5.2 B 
a « " 

w ?■ I- ** 

^X 
B w 
4) 
4) X 
IS" 
E-= 
ON 

'f> 4) 

X B 
" E 
—''« 
c a 

"3 B 

2 U-B 
O X si 

*c X u « 
IS a « B 
a..: o e 

•8 

to © 

v 0 

«I 
ES 

"S B 

6. p 

15 

® 5S 

X 

• E 
a n 
c u 
E -B 
E <J 
a E 

4> "O >> 
•— I- X 
X B 
u •O 4) 
B 
E 
X 
4) 
u 
4> 
E 
J«i 
B 
E O 
»1 
0 4) 0) 
4) B 
W 
a E 
% 
_o 
B X 
0 
£ •£ a 
w O 0- 

a- — 

B B 

J< X 
B O 
E &. 

mm, "*-< 

X 

E "" ■ 
2 « 4) 
Büx 
E « E 
3 «i-E 
"5 .5 'r 
x^-° 
C5 •" V. 
T3^ a 

£!.= 

Dg,» g 00 

OOg B M — 

ä as 

60"*^ to 
CD« 
'" 5 o • 
3 cß 15 
•o o 
0 3 C >, 
-5 O O B. 
B S, 
OS 

K<:5xz 

tu 

"•OH 4> « < 

0) 

u ™ a X 
_Sj -£1? 
x > 
« — «-. o 
u o o 
P E C 
S 1) ID 00 

4) & 

HE 
4> 3 

•3 E -i-* B 
I?.0. « Ox 

•- o.'« c 
Ill's 
E *- _ 4> 

4) u c x: s i> -£ 
x; "o <y u B x> e 
■^ a «J s u ? 
B 5 
« ._ 
« E * ~ «p 
Si c rs ^ « 
4) „^ w P* B u 
Ü & 
<« U B _; 4> 
•—X) x; p 4> 
__ 3 _ "ob ^ 
« >,_ tS « "5 
ÜO^ B O u S? O 
00-— « 
o „ *: « — __ ^ 

-*"_'C- 4> 
B "O «I B CL 
1 
B U B S c a 
s 
, ,, 5 B H » " 
J JJ u X! _, .2 

B ÖD.-*-* 4> — S — 
o "5 X O O B 
4) 2 < ^5 X! u 4> 
33 _ 4) w 
.2 ^ S -s ^ -B 

£_^oo g"s c B-r 

•Bü^^g^U« 
_ 8 K£S J; 

• X 3 
■ ■" o 

V-CBSOU^^; 
Xj 4) o « -JS -O » Is 
K 4) a 
_ anV, BTX: 

tj-'£Js«-5oc 

■— w x ■ 

c u _ " *g ™ — .-a 

x M - = -o Ö . 
■" S C"s <J « 6) (j 

S 8 £ S £ S.'S I 
t) C <— 3 ° 4> - 
CO &. o cix -5 B 

41 s 

«I3 
x '5 
S "° 
'& .52 
•O 13 
4) C 
t> " 
i."° 
O 4) 

4) 
X 

3 4) 
O 4) 
X X 

K « 
O B 
in X 
"«3 .- 

4) 41 
"3 ^ 

I ü 

£0 

B B ^o 

•=-a E 
§|J 
ü B - 
M g S 
aoc 33 
o , B 
_ rt •" 
(/1 ^ £ 
1= B •- 
u C 
_Sj ü « 
X w tn 

 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS, Page 11 

195 

PATTERN FOR CLEAR-PLASTIC COVER FOR &FM CAN 

to 
Z 
H 
O 
UJ 
o 
I ' 
I- 
D 
cc 
S 
I- 
O 
co z 
s 
u. 
UJ to 
i- Z 

UJ 
h- 
I- 
< 
a. 
t- 

a. 
2 
O 
CJ 
UJ 
X 

O 

to z 
o 
O 3 C 
o 
W O 
Z ui o u 
3 
C 
I- 
H !- 
10 z 
O O 
< 
a 
K 
UJ 
o 
&. 
CO 
to uj 
Q. 
to 2j 
tu 
K 
li. 
a 
O 
z 
Q 
H 
Z 
LU 
Z 
E a. 
UJ 
I 
I- 
I- 
< 
to K 
CJ 5 
UJ < 
«j a, 
~ Z 
E 
i- 

O ^ 
y. w 
to 
Z 

UJ 
(- 
(=• 
< *2 

CUT ALONG 
ENDS OF MARKS 
ALSO CUT ON 
THIS LINE 

CUT ALONG 
ENDS OF MARKS* 
ALSO CUT ON 
THIS LINE 

llll|lll!|l!!!|llll|ll!l|llll|IIHji!Ji|Hn:;iii 

20 15 10 5 0 5 10 >.. ?.0 

UJ — e 
< 3 X 
CO Cl UJ 

20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 20 

PAPER SCALE (TO BE CUT OUT) 

SHORT SIDE 

OPEN EDGE 

THREAD LINE 

8-PLY LEAF 

O 
w 
z 
o 

THIRD-FOLD EDGE 

FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN 
(CUT OUT EXACTLY ON SIDE LINES) 

PATTERN PAGE (8) 

CAUTION: XEROX COPIES OF THE FINISHED-LEAF AND THE 

SCALE PATTERNS WILL BE SLIGHTLY TOO LARGE. 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 12 

196 

o 
z 
< _ 

-I 
SS 

IU t- 

S 
LLI 
> 
o 
z 

< 
o 5 
UJ < 
O -J 
E 3 
< a 
X o 
u z 
►- u 
z °- 
Z o. 
z 

a 
$ 
a 
J 
z 
er 
O 

41 © 

« £ 
41 u 
£ 41 

O "> 

5B 
e > 

IS £ w 

■" " 

4> _ 

« S 
o "° 
4) « 
C< s« 
« 'S 
<~ iH 

4) K 
O ™ 
41 tft 

B CJ 
o 1) 

O 'S 
f>J CU 

C3 

£g EL 

WF5 

"5 

u 
(3 
4) 

4) es 

<; 4: 

5 u 
es s 
Ba- 

3 
X> 

e 
o 
S 
es 

« 

I« 

8) 
U 

e ä 

&£ 
** o 
•o — 

u 3 
8« 

E -S 

it: U- 

41 

41 £ 

'S 41 t 00 
° JE -5 \ 
41 ""' Ä "^ 
O O *"' 4) 

& ^ c s 
t B « a, 
3 T3 S 
E .S S « 

E JS 

£S u 

41 t/5 

es *- 
01 fcw «u 
JS o X) 

e 41 
o 

4) 
« B 
CK 5f 
o n. 
"5 1 « 
i« 
■fcrf 
3 41 
o U N 
41 
4i 
o K tis 
X! J= 
o 
Kl 
tau 
> -w e 
ts E JJ<I 
an es 
» e fc 
tu PH t/1 
3 e. 

_ fc 4) 

"5 - &"! 

41 ei —■ -5 c 5 

<s .-a o 
Ö K M « Ä JS 
i> & J= — 

CJ Ä >- 

3 .. 

ü a. c 

ü , 

a 4) es 

Qö .a .s 8 
4i *i ob «* 
Xj « \ | 

*? 41 >*.£ 

O 7. !-^ 
w ^r 4> 
«ei . 
E 41 O dl 

41 .S 
O » 41 H 
. ^- "o < 
3 so) 
. 41 w 3 ei 
= 5xeS 
■'.£■■" fc ^ 
t- w R 
■S 41 *^ 41 

' O E ü ^ i 

'S J^tS^ 

B°< 

es M^ 
Ä E ! 

C-E g B 
3 4) 
E £ 
! > 

= Ä 

« S 

»1 

S B CJ 

's! S"° 

g -•» <u 

41 b 41 e« , 

5J » . 
Cl ^ 

c y v. Ü-. 
^ £ 4) E-. 

r E e 
■ !5 ei 

° t™ 

® >,M * 
O XI >,£ ' 
■g-a.ll 
.:i »i « 

41 Ä 
E := 
i£ » 
■— cj 
E 
. c 
■o «. 
es O 
41 

6) « 
" ■£ 

e E 
a es 
Ä « 
o — 

41 "O 
•S B ■ 
•; 1. e 
41 £ -o 
er E 
: es 
4) ü -B 
£ X) O 
t— 'K ~ 
ur t) 
° BÖ. 

ill 
•rlf 

41 o £ 
> E ., 
4> c x: 
S E = 
r, <-> 
~ E£ 

*• c "I 

^ E 
4) 
X 41 . ■= 
es E 
st c 

41 41 

**" 41 
•<- 2 
O es 

'S 
M 
_E 
J= 

B « 
O 
•o 
3 
O 

41 
£ 
41 
X) 
oo 

Ot 
41 

41 *" O 

JB 
M 
3 
O 
Z » 
■s *-c £ „ x) rr 
T3 
a 
41 

2J = 

.B 3 C 
~ C-B 
w „ — 
ü w 3 
X) ^ "! 
41 
2 T 'S o = •- 
00 -T i: '> — 

3 
O 

EB 

•4- c 

31- S g 8 
££ g 

5 ^ © o 
oSSS 
*^ « t> u 

C3 "^ 

es I^J© 
M es '% s e 
.5 lb* ",~v ^ C5 
2oU §" 
41 ^^ S 13 
B &«' « 
Sog«» 
es *■ S 3 JÖ 
- 4> V 
S OS 
S5,£B 
1 o 
i- -B BH 
10 
1^414) 
S B "M"MS U 
-_i *- & C 41 
u Ä « « E ■- 
S 5 o o «: ' 
x: « cj ijx: tu 
c/l M-i ^ £+-2 
*> u t 41 S til 

& M 
fi B 

41 

3 .. 
M , 

■c W °1S 

41 re J3 
S N H 

y.-B^£ 

41 41 
E£ 
9. eSe^ 
O 

"5 M5 

°<£ ö 

B. 

3 B _ 

3 2 o 
Kl 

1) « g 
U5£ a 
es es "S 

2 
< 
CJ 

N 
0 
OS 

> 

ß 

41 ss "O 
£ 'S B 
■^ & es 
o a <f> es 

41 41 
00— 

K 
41 

«£.£ 
« = e 
jj g s 
£-! 
41 

•si's 

Bi-O u 
Ä — JS 
B 5 *« 
.B es o 
—< — 41 
O O _» 
in"« 
-& CJ > 
Sä -S M 
£ w s 

S 41 3 
- — «1 

3 •C.E B 
** JS ^S 

„£ -o B £ 
S~ss = 2, 

JS w 4) 4) 41 

■*" 'S "5, c "g 4> 
f c£ gö S 
^ o *, v-° ^ 
"o c *B , « *5 
_n 5 .*; "O 4> 2 
Ä ra S i) v- c" 
o »" 's* e 

41 £ 41 &< 41 O 
S u£ fl V r< 
£ Mg- £fj 
— o o. c 3 
^■- es £ <u ._ 
E? 41 - JS £ TJ- 
j. .= x =• m „ 
. &fl o e 
°> _ a. B 
4>.S 
•— ~ .-^ ^ 
cfl: t, .w .— 
o c js 2 "> ^ 
« B O S 4> 
.I»" MM g 
4) "™ B m o o "™ 
3 « O S2 c E 4) 
*M~ : O ü 3 - 
{; ä — = °" o 

o -3 .1 S jg g S 
0 S 5? er El? "ö 

W D V) D - U. QJ 
Mfc e E ^ ü £ 
E <- 25 4» •— C3 — 
S £ _: ° E 'S o 
u- = o S = w •i3 

w i^ .« « o e> 
s a to es o M 

4) 41 4) 

4i y M 
£ -2 E 
f«3 '£ 
O o ^ 

: o c 
a"S ° • 
5« C03 
r; 41 b. .— 
fi« -■= 
O 41 ftg 
• 5 41 Js 
DS»£ 'S 
.S Mt_ fS 
^ E O —' 

C E 4) «> 
S 13-S 
afc §"« 
.« 
O 41 
„. -= n -o 

"" i« e 3 
"* 4) C -o 

ü -^B C 
« fc- o fc 
41 J O. 

K o -a •£ 
E >> « C. 
° P J> o 
"5 „ -E « 
= ° « E 
« u •- » 
.£ .£ £ o 

4) E/5 

M (U 
E JS 

V o 
ZI 
— =■ °£ 
>>"" ß-'g 
rr - o ^ 
JS -O ' 
' E 
O 
.2Pg 

B O 
41 ** 
O B, 
5 41 
•tr JS >> t/3 
& -■=: 

£ B. 

41 'S 
X E 
ü —- 
— u- 
£ s 
.2 w 
-K SJ 
o £ 
o a 
.SS 
"O 

es oo 

es O. 
41 - 

es b 
E "S 
u E 

41 41 5 ° 

es tn 
B.JS 

41 v. 
B 4) 
es T3 
B B 

4. 3 

£"° 
©1 

-*J j- 

•O B 
4) Tl 
B 
2^ 
5 i2 41 ' 

» fll 
•o£ 
» 8 
B £! 
& B 
5 E 

4) H 
B . 
es vi 
** B. 
O 'S 
_g ie 

E B 
8§ 

*£ 
JS 5 
M-" 
«J2 « 
*3 o B 
ifl -J-J X 
■a " tÄ 
8~-^ 
£ JS _es 

41 o °" 
£ m e 
*" TD £ 

•s.|-£ 

41 -^ es 
41 41 M 
^ x; <s 

^ j£ 

.3 41 
es 00 
Mc 
es 1- 

IM 

"S & 
■ E 
es 

O (D 

SIS 

3 ,4> 

J'5 

o S 
•-£ 

E 

\5 
41 
CO ' 
41 <•- 
JS es 
^j — tu 
« u "7 
o £ 
i i"s 
E«ti 
tu 
es 

8's 
tu 41 
JS ~ 
£~ *- E 
4) 
B£ 
& e_ 

•- <D 41 
JS £ 
41 .w 

Et** c 

g B « 

tu -K 
EB " 

£0 
IfS 

41 H 

JS £ ,4) 

; ® E 

*j £ o 
1*5 2 

£ C 
+■* c> 

•SB-S 

>, ° X1 41 g 

8"C u 
w- es x 
s- t- ej 
es JS X 

B 

4> 

B 
41 

B 
O 
B 
& 
O 
JS 

o 
B 

41 
£ jj 

es es 

5 8. 
§.E 
£ §. 
b- BI 
es es 

es 
41 

^ 
1 = 

Is M 

E _ ' 

» es 

es £ 
u .- 
S S: ' 
— -O , 
dl es 
JS v 
±i u 
JS 
x: — 

4: &■ 
b 41 
^£ 
S c 
B O 
T3 

M 

o 3 £ 
JS o £ 
.!£ t*- oc 
3 es 3 
IT- .41 .-> 

I E C 41 
_c-S£ 

«^ « E 
u C£T 

^ 41 41 B. 
41 B U O 
> S 3 -" 

Ä ="S JS 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 13 

197 

erf 
co 
H Cd 
w 
CO H 
CJ Ü Pi < 
w z M tJ 
M W E* 
pi 
P-i Z H 
Ed H Cd 1^5 
<: 

Q ffi D 
W 3 PL, 
t-J 
H pS >H C*4 H 
CO Ed M O Cd 
Cd 
33 
CO 

Cd <! « PM 
O 
2 PM Z 
< Cd 
H 
CO CO S3 

Cd 
M-H Z O 

33 
H 

A 

££ o 

Cd Ü • 

l-l 
3 O Ed N 
M 
CO <! 
Z Pj 
CO M Cd 
co M <tj 
Cd pi H 
IS ed 
Cd H 33 
>J < 
O Cd PLH 
H 
i>! 
Z H O ^3 O 
CO H 

Z E| 
H S CO 
CJ O Cd CO o o 
w ai u w 
Q 

: CM h 
Cd Cd 

Pi En Cd ssi 
£S3 CM 
< 
CD Z H 
o o 

Cd Cd 
Cd Pä PH 
CB <3 
H H 

Cd Cd 
Cd H M Cn 33 33 
o H H 

<! Pi M 
H Cd Q CO Cd O 
^H 
Ed H En 
<! 
» Cd 
CO iJ 

= §3 Cd 
o o 
3 O l-l 
H Z 3 Oj 

Cd 
P3 - O Cd CJ < 
H Cd Z HI Cd 

Pd Cd 

H M 33 
O P* CJ 
Pi <! > 
WHO 
<: 
> 2 O O H 
OÄ.W 3 3 H 
uo« H H <: 

I co 
C ) 
~) -J- 1- 
o i- cr 
1- * < 
r- cr a- 
O < X 
2 s y 
cr 5 
O 
a 
O ~ 

Q 
< 
LU 
CC 
X 
I- 
LU 
X 
I- 
LU o 

oT" -■* 

a 
_i 

o 5S 
LU 
Z 
-1 X ^ J 
a o cr ,-* 
< h- n < 
UJ 
LU UJ LU 
cr 
rr co cr 
X 
LU 
I < h 
UJ LU CC 
a. CC LU 
< X ■> 
1- 1- o 

LU m 
a I 
*9 
O HI 
°-, oc 

ca * 
.,i cr 
UJ "- 
CO < 
3 5 

U-i 
CO 
CU 
iH iH 
H 
•H <U 
& 43 
4-1 

4-1 
CO C3 
0) O 
iH 

T3 
CU CU 
43 a 
4-1 CO 
t-H 
43 cu 
o 
•H CU 
43 42 
& 

o 
C3 U 
O 

CO 
T3 CU 
C3 M • 
CO M C3 
CO CO 
C 43 CU 
«OH 
O CJ 
r-l 
OJ CO >- 
43 CJ M 
4-1 -H CU 
l-i > 

CU 4-1 
•d u u 
•H CU Q. 
CO H 91 
fi OJ ü 
•H 

CU CU 
CU 00 43 
43 CO 

•U 4-1 
rH ^ CO 
<-i O 3 
T! ? 6 
5 1 
43 T3 
4-1 (50 CO 
CO -H <U 
43 43 U 
4J 43 
CU 4J 

T) 43 
CO 4-1 CU 
HI 43 
M CU 4-1 
43 4-1 
4J CO "4-1 
iH O 

CU 3 
43 CO CO 
4-1 (3 4-1 
•H h 
4-1 CO 
o o a- 
4-1 
CO T) 
4-1 CU CU 
M > T3 
CO M C3 
O. CU <U 
CO CU 
!U CO 
43 4-1 3 
H CO CO 
3 
S cu 
,c 
O TJ 4J 
Z cu 

,—^ 
, 
cu 
r-t 
43 
fl 
4-1 

^ 
1-1 
o 
S 

nj 

tw 
o 

cu 
o 
4-1 

cu 
43 
4J 

O 
4-1 

CU 
Cu 
(0 
4J 

T3 
£3 
co 

CO 
0) 
C3 
•H 
r-1 

u 
cu 
13 
>j 
o 
,n 

CO 
4-1 
•H 

ÖQ 
(3 
o 
!-( 
CO 

CU 
T3 
•H 
/-s 3 
U 60 

CO 
Z i-4 
P£i 43 
Cd 4J HO« 
Z c cu 
H 
3 cu u 
H 4J 
•^ a o 
< 3 
3 CO C4-I 
CU O 
3 CU 
CO l-l 
CU 
CU 43 
43 H 

4-1 
3 
cj 

198 

— D 

_re o 

re 

■g >, 
as: 

ÜX 

o re 

£ t: 
« > 
** a. 
"O Li 
.E ■" 
15 w 

c Ü 
re — 
u S. 
<u ^ 
X 13 
— U 
h- > 
o o 
E E 

o 
[0 u V 

« c SS > 
•3 re — © 

e- «x 
§«£- 
£ I Si e 
"> Ji > 
3 u 
tr a. 
» o 
I « 

= x 
re —• 

c a 
0) 

- E 
fc- .3 
O C = 
X v ■- 
V£ ' 
V 
« £ O. u 
<u ^B'g 
■£ "ob si s 
fc- 3 £ o 
O 3 ~ .5 
X w o " 

X - 

re C: 3 
a 

re c> 3 u 
r -" oo-f 
u^_ re * 
•* ^ w c 
S « 
a 
u 
u !s ° w 
re t, _c 
c aw 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 14 

Cl ^ 
E~ 
re w 
to o 

0)* 

«.a 

Eü 

re E 

a-?. 
•es 
« > 
3 O 

• c 

S B 

o > 
o 
u 
ci 
X 

£ 3°£ 

re 
n 
u a re 
a 
o 
— 

t^ 

.. « 
re 
Cl 

o a. 
re 
u 
Cl 
ci Ü 
D. 
re (A 
o LI 
U.*5 

xx © o£ 
;~tj 2S- 
c 
Cl u fc- c re 
3 < ^ o « 
• w x: 
C 0) SO 
c 

o 
a 00— 

u 

o _ 
a. 
c re 
E 
•o 
*^ 00 n 
V > 

c 
0 -s «; 
a 
Xi 
<u re 
o "3 
3 
Ü re 
©- <, 
0 .£ 

re 
u 

0 
u 
— 
t/5 

B 
E u 
o 
re u 
re a» 0 •o c 

c re 
re u 

a o 

fc- 
o 

Cl 

o 
<u 
u 

ci U. 

00 
c 

3 

■D 

4> 

fa- re 
O 
E >- >i 
3 o 
o «i Ä 
o 
c - d !_; 
u 
u 
(/I _o Ü fc- ■£ _re '« 

c — re D .2- 
Ü _ £ 3 r; O 
<J — — — ~ > 
u 2 o : oo M 

o re c « 2 i 

,-S re - x re o 

t
a

e
k
r
a
n
i

.
n
r
e
t
t
a

x -a o . *< 
e
h
c
v
n
t
o
i
c

e
o
n
t
© „>•- *-Z 
o
t
u
n
o
b
a

l
i
c
n
e
p

e
h
t

«
n
i
l

5

n
o

e
r
u
s

r
e
t
n
e
c

e
h
t

,
k
c
i
t
s

a

r
o

f
o

e
c
e
i
p

d
e
n
i
l
t
u
o

e
B

.

n
a
c

.
n
r
;
i
t
t
a
p

r
e
p
a
p

g
n
o
l
a

s
i
h
t

f
o

e
h
t

e
h
t

T
A
,
l
i
E
c
n
S
n
e
a, re -o S> c.0 
§ Si u i- ~ £ 

f
o

n

d
o
o
w

i
e
p
p
u

c
f

e
h
t

n
i
r
p

f
o

a

n
o
e
i
t
l
a
b
c
f
a
o
o
t
v £ o ., x o 

w
o
l
e
b

e
d
i
s

e
h
t

\
l

— O cß ~ — fc« 
p
o

<

t

e
B

.

n
r
e
t
t
a
p

:

e
h
t

n
o

f
o

p
o
t

e
h
t

s
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

T
A
E
S

e
m
a
s

4
/
3

s
i
i

T
A
E
S

e
i
h
t

f
o

p
o
t

e
h
T

t
r
a
p

y
n
a

e
l
b
i
g
e
l
i
i

e
k
a
m

r
o

a

t
u
c

,

T
A
E
S

e
h
t

e
k
a
m
o
T

y
l
e
r
u
c
e
s

t
i

e
p
a
t

d
n
a

g
n
o
l

o •O 's u 
x v ° x 
— x -a — 
o .52 s _ 
— c u o 
.t: c o . 
e
e
h
p
t
a
t

n
o

h
t

'

s
r
e
d
n
I
i

m
e
R
"

e
h
t

g
n
i
g

f
o

r
o
/
d
n
a

e
u
l
g

d
n
a

s
e
d
i
s

e
h
t

l
l
a

r
e

e
p
a
t
-
y
k
c
i
t
s

p
e
e
k

1

t

c

jn u * E 
o O.Ü2 « 
t
h
a
T
r
e
p
O

m
o
r
f

t
s
e
b

s
i

t

e
r
o
r
fc- — re 3 
S" E *■ « 
fc- Cl fc. .« 
u X O O 
m

T

.
h
s
i
n
r

d
n
i
m
e
R
"

.

M
F
K

e
h
t
f

e
h
t
f

e
p
a
t

c
i
t
s
a
l
p

r
a

X 

r
o

d
a
e
r
h
t

t

e
n
o

l
c

e
d
i
s

O O <D c 
e
m
t
s
i
u
j
d
a

h
t
i

t
u
o

d
e
s
u
n
u

w
M
F
K

t
u
C

n
a

.
e
l
b
a
t

e u tu 
e x x 

^3 «J fe: 
es Ä •*■ 
= o — 
fj o-> 
oo o Q 
,EcZ 
S « m 
a. S « 
3 £ 
(A 
fci <D C 
re X re 
GJ *^ u 
"H "c w 
re cj s- 
**- re C3 
l<l 

c . !£ 
»> c.5 
L> re L„ 
x "re 
w «^ tu 

3 — 
»■Sc 
CLJ2 a. 
re 3 <£ 

"S •" 3 
*TJ O 
ft Ü 
^ > 
« 1> X 
»3 » 
c re 
« «"g £^ 

u. <J , 

2^ 3 

fc- Wi *- 
X P re 
— t» g 

Ü o o 

£ 3 <U 
w >>Si 
«S£ 

S! 1) £ X 
3 w- 
o o 
3 X 

x u 
« 

o E 

3 S O 
O *— r- 

rS x 

o u 0 
WT: ** 
u - w 
o o S 
U — re 

_ « ■"> 
3: ty . 
re *- c 
E5 « 

£6 

<ö .§ 

<L> x 
3 *■' « 

I Cl 
i > 

! X) u> 
; re PQ 

;^ I 
re rt -, 
* <-> S^ 

!-£ 

UJ v. Ci 
e x 

X re 
*~ ^ « 
u re «J 
3 S« 

5 o c 

u tu a. 

•2"g S3 
— 3 S 
o K 
c re 

S E = 

*5? O fc>- 
o x re 

o .- 
5 ao 
o.E 

re r 
■*" 3 
u — 
X T 

ÜX 
Cl w 
fc- 
0) o 
X 2 
^ '« 
o.E 
V. (D 

1 * 
■5.S 

§2 
T3 1) 
re X 
u — 
fc- fc>- 
X o 

tn 3 
,3 O 
.C X 
D re 
£■ _>> 

■^ S' 
o o 
•a t3 
« "^ 
II 

u o 

o o 
S 3 

00 
3 
'5 
X 

■c 
3 
O 

x? ci t: 

X O T3 
«7« 
Sw £P 
8 »-S 
fc2££ 
T: .» 
5 "° 3 
*-. oo^ 
*- fc- z 
c re 
ci JS . 
x u 3 
^j o 
o o — 
3 3 re 
T c « 
— Si 3 
§-* = 

E.-o 
H'- » 
«OX 
«£ B" 

S oo « 
> 2 ,3 
re *" !- 
ci — 
— XI) 
o oox 

•3 || 3 
_ «5 

«j 3 C 

<u .2 

« JJ X 
X re — 
'S _ Cl 

On« 
E a^'.' 
^x|g 

ci x *£ 
a. .Si « -6 
3 c o ci 
lA 
re "> ■» 
« 5 5 
Cl 
(/.res 
X 
3 o !2 

rfi. Cox 

Cl 

T, 
re 
c 
.£ 

O 
B- 

Cl 
X 

3 

V 
•o 

x> 
Cl 

o 
T> 
3 
Cl 
c 

3 

Ci e 

8 « 
> 5 
re i^_ 
Ü o 
° 9r 
i 2 
** ü 

o ,o 
w u 
o x 
°f o 
"O u 
c c 
fc. re 
8..B 
C.T3 
3 <U 
Ci 3 
T3 re 

J2 3 

t re~ 
— ** '-5 
o o re 
« X JJ 

fc 3 T3 
S « v 
o ° S 
.< 3 C 
J* Si 

^ 2? re 
re 3 q_ 
>5 3 C 

X X 

.E-g 

- S. 
& o 
_o x 

^ 00 

E£ 

u *J ^i 
Q. w V) 
re o re 
" X 3 
t/) 
ao— 
C V O 
o c 
i re u ^S 

x re ^^ 
- N « « 
i_ i « 5 w 
's - <u re m 

x: — 3 
ut: . u J< 

■£U§3£ 

v x 
> — 
8"s 

s 
& 
o 
•o 
•3 
Cl a 

x 

Ci 
•o 

c> 
X 

O- tA 
O T3 

S5 X 
O Z 
■o5 
<S 
■a 9 
g E 
TO ^. 
CQ O 
3 

r 3= — 

is 1 

.2 ci 

o 

3 re 
u 
ci 
X 

Cl 

u _- 
X 3 
t: o 

x £ 
■^ « 
■w x 
3 = 

. O 
5 o 
•S-g.- 
4) ^ 
•*- t» 
W< UM 
° t> 
E-5 
'= 3 
ci •- 
X c 

*l o. « 
2 « re 
x - 

00 . 
3 XJ 
•a £ 
3 o 
u-i- 

3 £ 

I« 
u fc— o 

O u 
w O 

■si 

g 00 

II 

— c 
3 -— 
f 3 
fc- re 
re ci 
Ü u 

^ C- C) 
O Ci 
z-5 

'S» 
Ä o 

00 u 
.Et; 
"go 
aS 
V* °~ 
3 fc- 
K O 
fcj. Cl 

Ji 3 
ci 3 
P s 

O ü 
S£ 
5 OD-- 
US. 
oo re r; 
O X £■ 
" —ti" 
Cl 
c re -a 
o w ci 
u re oo 
« ts tj 
-o re 
ci x 
fc- u 
ci 
« 3 

u > re < 
o - 

X 

Cl 
8 

re 
E 
V) 

> re 
u 
1 
•u 
Cl 
a. 
re 
00 
o 
o 
X 
a 
Cl 
W5 
Cl 
X 

Cl 
J£ 
'X 

X X 

o © 
« .S3 

j5 u 
e u 
exj 
U fc. x re 
■"* ci 
C 3 

6 & 
•o re 
•9 fc- 
e © 
c> « 
21 ö 
Cl u 
re & 
X 3= 
— re 
'S E 
■o w 
re .i 
b X 
x ■" 
■M> U 
u & 3 

fc- a> u 
e
r
o
o
h
m
t
f
re ■£ ° 
&.— Cl 
u &2 
.Cue/) 
•5 ci - 
a.© © 
g« u u 
2 ox 
_ ul w 
3 
O 

* 3 

«'S 
O 

E 
s
t
C> r
J- 

o 
3 

■o 

re 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS, Page 15 

199 

c_ 

i 6* 
td Z CO O >- X . 

O J a •« -• XS3IX DE- Z.-J e-t 
E- X M OX 00< Cd S3 ■ -Cd < 
-COC (d 11 fr.«>-iO E- O M COZ «1 COCd 
CO E-E-O a > Q O < = M M[d t» f« i-i Q 
Ub<3 Z « X WICd < r- 0= EH O M -J W 
bd "-OOOEX CdtaSX ■■Cd — *C0O O «Cd 
z-a < co ola za J* co >- co a coco 
■ ■X'- ma >->iiJ<oo O cdco « cdss 
Cd X-J 3« C- E-i safe. <S X •- H CO E- -J X J< 

fr- C/J vJO ■ 3 ufc>H£-tOS X >■ COW O ■ 

«■t-.XP- CJZ B5 O id Id H >• X-J >■ Q ■ X CO 
3E cd >- zft-ua mzE- o co < z co OOM 
UJ -Q II a OZ* X OH S3Q3Z HCd 
• (nun -ttotobdzaJ MO o * w 
r-t *t CO CO X m E-ko S Cd < i- Cd h* * J i- Cd z * 

ei 
Z X 
o 
-J s 
* < t-OOXp O P. O 1 >■ H CO <Q E-Cd 

co z Q S3 ^. Mpiffca * «c * w k. E-•- » < * 

OE--X Tj. <£sO Cd OOSO Cd X Cd < H Cd« 

COX Z < Q M < Cd < < fa- z < a fa. 

S 

o E- 

Cd td CO • Cd a 

a Cd X Z CO < xfc-CdCd Q OX O O Cd 
(/} 
d E-t td O t-t Ec CO CO < HE- Z E- Z td U Z O < 
X 
o o o <a < r-. co e-poo x >-. ->> ■« 
< < Cd •!■ S3 QWX Z O.S3Z XI-3 XIX O X CO -> 
E- z x <a « Bpa.au uau s- o-s E-z 
U z - co a M xx jfa: o x xix w o * ol E- opa H 
as P 
Cd Cd X O JMUIZM >-. Cd P. < üX 
o fa. J 
a 
fa. a w x = w E-p aa xz u i x 
o 

Q Z <C Cd <n>«Ma too O i-t mtoh OllH 
S < E-t x (0 n CuHtJE-o cofch-J -«J «1E- < cow* 

fa, Q 1 >-t-HWE-u.<0 fa« a O «< Id U E- Cd X 
tt U < Cd • Cd C X Id Cd Z M in fa. X Z *« Id X Z ^ C" X 
CO 
13 t-t CO CO UldQOJSx« Cd a S3 Cd W t- O X Cd 
X 
w <xo<x o>-3w>-i a <z coacoxtdO coco coco 
« < td S3 K O < X Cd a <: O < OHSQU E E N Q 
Cd X X X O MQUtSI Xfa-tdZfalX fa. p-0. fa. E- SS Cd 3 6» 
P CJ OX a<WCdfalE-ttXi-tCaE- MrtXIn UM n. O CO 
s ~ O Cd < *pS XS3 Uli- -XX X >-i Z X 
CO td E- Q « W S» a Op P ld*fl U CO ■■« QJH3 < OX 
as 
zx x-ia-jT zx sä«co tdlQ td a a «UH-S. 
Hf-DBJZ J Ix4t<UOUU £-• < H U CO fa. E-E-X 
cdsxcNatx i-x «e < 
MO»- faKCdCd«- uje->J < 
XZE-HOX oawN 
E-ISSCOZ xoxx a -< w as 
— x-^ ■• fa, o 
ZUOHCQ E- i- E-i E-t axHcozto 
Cd X a. a W E- • S " H M a a -w w x td 
Cd < X 
O« X < M SSZhiOO X CO H i a i- co fa] W X 
o o X 
<| Cd fal-5 hUOOHHMilb ■ E- Q 
tfna Cd CO Ö 
C0.J • fi 
-* P W X 
- « -<> > x o < p 
<<nuao) 
W H. 
z< • «* r-ldlfl 
td X W-f- W td 
— a ottzt- coco < x a c x cdp a < x o OE-CO ■• 
OS ic co a z O <HMM • E-ZZ DE-<<P»= Z 
M X 
CO fa. td Cd td W t- 
co td Cd 
Q 
£ os-a z ttX E- » 
O Z ri o -. H < H fa, fa. a J O. P P 04EIZXUO P 
X Cd 4 W 
Xfaif- Z < <X! -> O XXZ 
UHHHHKU fa.*»*«; 

td a o < «ta << —0<z 
x w fa. — a- w N Cd Cd fa. Cd Cd f» X t- td «- 
H-HÜJ-Q OS 
H CO CO O J -J «H B CO X fa. 

a fa.E-1 X m Cd Z < E-f-t CdCd< X 
z 

MOWO C0fr-OCd<<ZiJCdE- < 

Z It- ■ ■ Cd O *" -J X 

z -K x a» IH H 

P X 

«! 

W Z CO 5 >- X 
o CdG < •• XS31XQE- Z J E- 
E- X — OX O O <C Cd S3 Ed < 
E-CO O Cd H fa, i--■ O E-O bö COZ « 1 COCd 
£- E-O * >00 <SX >-Cd *-■(-■ — Q 

to 
u fc S3 Z CO X CO td <-* EHO M J CO 

o E- 

g x i-> x e- « z 

-H O O O Z X ■ Cd «X •■ td — * COO O CO td 
ZJ4 CO a a, ZP -J * co H. coo. cow 
■■ cs I-I m ui w J-SOOOCdCOi- US 
r* < X ►-• H W E- «J X -3 < 
Cd X -3 * C- 6- S3 
OE-E-E = >.CQfal O- 
E- CO --M3 0 • 3 (5 
Z O Cd td E- >• os j >. O ■ X W 
E- cd a COZE- o co < z co op« 
»Cd *- Z 
ZX O« 3P = Z E-Cd 
to -oua o 
• co caw — o < o u: z a-3 MO o M cd 
r-i ►-* co co x m E* CO atd < — MM * J i- Cd z * 
3B < >-. o o x p a a, O I >• S- CO <Q E-Cd 

XO Cd O O CO Cd X Cd < E-t Cd t-t 
Cd E-t fa. * * «t at td Cn E-M. * < * 

MZQ3 N *-" 

o 
z X 
c 
-J z 

P N < Cd < < fa. Z < X fa. 

CO X z < 

Cd Cd X O 3 

MM CO • Cd a 

Cd Q Z < Cd < 
Q<f-B o n fa. 

fa] E- Id CO I- 
u «c a < H co E- 
« < a x S3 

fa, P I >< 9- fr- id £- C, *! O &.Z 0<UUf Ed X 

< < Cd ■ • S3 Q 

UH«]tO UCdQUJau-1« Cd 3 S3 Cd CO (- O «Cd 

w X X Cd X Z CD < X >• td td POX O O Cd 

« 
X CO W < P E- Z E-i ZCdO ZO< 
e z 
f-OQX - -.> M 
< 
jaao uao >* o« E-z 
<X Z 0. S Z XIJ XIXU XBOM 
Cd Cd Je HI ■- Cd 0.4 K5 X 
X c 
u z E-. COP M OS X -J x ox «l« w OK ol Er o a E- 
fa. C3 
> i- so too a\f io p E- ou •- 
a 
<JHQ toifa. 3 NIJ « P < to < * 
O 
X o 
fa. a wis-1 t-Q aaxzcdi x 
« tt fal < Cd ■ Cd O E Ed Id S£ id to fa. X Z < Cd X Z -^e- X 
fa «: x o < « o>«cd« Q <z macoxcdo coco coco 

X 
c 
< « Id S3 ZO< X Cd a < (J < OCdSQU «X«0 
z 
Cd X X X O HtQUSI Xfa-falZCdX C«, p- O. fa. E-i Z WD OH 
P O OX P < W falK E- *- H W fa. WM ä, O W 
3 w O Cd < »IS S3 S3 WH .s« E « Z X 
ui COCdhQn fal>. aClE" Cl (d <U CO --CO Q a H 3 < OX 
X ZX £J3iJ ZX S3 X CO Cd PCd a Q ntdHv 
MHCVIZ -J t».<f-«cww E- <C E- Cd W fa. t- E- X 
WOM Cd < Id Cd it tdfr-OJ < CdSXcNKX — X < < 
E-jZCOZ XOXS 3 -< Cd X XZE-i-tOX OBHN 
N- X -^. -■ fa. P 
HBcon H - a >- •- td a a -wco « td 
OÄXJ-tWXXZCwGOO °s w 
< fal td >-J hUOOH^NUb ■ e- o 
- X -« > > X Q < 2 
a [»HI X 3s Cd Z < E- E- CdCd < X 
z 
MOKOO Mt"OW<<Z«JtdE-t < 

M r-t a CdtO Q P Q X 
i-< P CO X 
< < m o m en 
CO — 
td X CO <-■ E- CO Cd 

W >d ■ P 
z < ■ < E- td X M 

Z ft- • CdO « iJ X 

td CO X 

td < X 

S3 X 

MI a o X Z E- COCO <XU (] x tdp a < x o OE-W ■■ 

>■ 
X id CO 3 Z O <1UHM .. E-tZZ DH<<Q*D Z 
a 
O z *-* o f-.E-<E-fa.fa.a-J&Q n o-«xxxfdo a 
a. o E- a 55 
Xfa,E-Z<<X — 

« X 
SB -« E SW in N CO fa. fal td td W ii W Cd fal 
Id X E- * 
X Id < W 
< a, <t >-p«:z 
O X K Z 
N Cd Cd fa. Cd Cd t» X f- Cd — 
H CO WO *J J .-« * CO E fa.ICd H-I- i- E- X Cd fa. * * * < 

Ed a O < 
X M CH w >. U 
P t-i ü E- a x 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 16 

200 

u 
E 
X 
I- 

i5 
UJ $ 
2< 

<0 Q 

-s o 
O UJ 

K>(V 

O K 

as a 

bJsij is 
! 

o 

S P 
O uj 
UJ £0 

<<2 

Ü5 — 
2 g 

£" £ UJ 

U CD 
_J ~ 
II 

Ü 
z 
o 
< 
I 

C O 4) B 
«-K «.-a 
*-■ c _ "" 
3 V 5 >> 
* K X 41 
iS v "" > 
w a) !S * 
41 t- 41 
S.Sj< o 

«■•33 
•- of . 

VO »E » 
^ 'S .52 ■" 
« ? c 
-x a & 

's1?;" ft 
O O M tj 

■w rt a c 
41 Cb— -S 
EÄ ft 
. w C 
2 « 4) S 

4lHH-^ 
2Ä .£ 
vi O VI 
a a fc 8 
o .is 41 Ou 

.t: ta , . 4i 
5 "^ — ft 
» ° -S 
4) c X •" 
.3 •= „ ft 
ft — c O 
— nrS o 
g '5 o-j- 

O Jg -O 41 41 

41 O 
DM VI 
re „ 
"" -o 
'S a 
O 4J 
«X g 
41 — O 
.2 <-> '•— 
"o* c 'w 
41 O 
££ ft 
« •=-,.= 
— *0 tfl 
re re 4) 

4> o re 
& ■» c 
O c — 
41 41 4) 
41 i,. 3 
X C ft 
* 11 ' 
V- X 00 
£ u.E 

4) („ re 
2 O X! 
3 41 
Cc 2 
u _ 
X> 4) ^3 
w •£ "3 
n « ■= 
x P 
£ o 
o 
tS 2 o 
«'S S 
&2 OJ 
.5 re-2 
-2 S 
^•° ü 

fc- O wl 
4J •" T3 
> -, cj 
««£ 

a ft.- .a * 

£ .2 T3 o c o 

JS »J l. Wl TT . 

U ft> >^ « 
.2 4i I £« ao 

g[_ X-§t3 4) 
£. _ s re x 

i^x^2i§ 
S^c* 2 fc-S 
B) 41 CS JS fc o •*< 
•x>In „e S 3 

41-5 ^\ S « £> 
5 « g 4) 3,W 
^ ■" ° "5 x uj ta 

^ftlil-s 

o ^" Q^ ID •*-■ re c 

O *^ U .JJ •*-> «4- « 
T3 £>£ "E. u ° C 
= -° <- « oj « 
4> J= ^C^ rt U S 
c O w . X> U w 

^^cll«« 

■s .S re o — ca 
„ ft D. 41 "a 2 « 
2 4i^ ft° u E 
« re ° - c •- fe 
a 5, 4i -S 4i _ £ 
3 or «I c ., x _ 

g < ^ re 5 •= M 

hSei 5 - .5 

'S u 41 
0 X X 

.5 C XT 
>- 41 3 
u u a 

u re 

A" ft 
^Z ft' 

.5« is 
^SE 
ü u "3 
>u ft 
•8 4» 
y 41 X 

00 VI 
3 •^ 
•3, a. 
O 
4) "w 
u u 
V) ft 
xn a 
-1 
X ■0 
< 
41 •0 
O 3 
re 
X 
V) CO 
tn 
X 

X 

on & 
3 O 
0 41 

*^ * fli 

"EL«-) "^ Si 
= 1 * 

z — 
5 pi 

2^ 

»&ja 
g 3 w 
•= «z 
re £ — 
- S;K 
«oB 
Ex H 
_-«Z 
.S ^a 
ft~ u 
^ 41 v 
fc 41 41 
° .3 X 
« 'S H s?-J 
41 ^H 
"8-2 
u 
c 
re 
x 

^- wi *» 
s re 
re 41 
o — 

x o 

3 g S a-« 
UI « 

re ti x 

. ■= -o 
3 4! 'w 

UJ 

»——a 
CO 

h- 

X 
UJ 

s 
o 
■s 

•o 
G 
O 

> 
o 
41 
_u 

re E 

ftg 
U u 

* -a-» 
*«« w. 
O © 

o 
ft 
o 

41 
3 X 
O % 
*w o 
O 41 
XI 

u ° c 
ft 41 re 
o xi " 

6 I? 
Owe 

= s» 

*; « X 

is « ° 
2 * a 
fa o So* 

- c a> 
41 X 
"% •§ £ 
x s ,t« 
41 .— *** 
e, s 
"" n- & 
c fc ° 
Z, "> "o 
s: o 
2 u s 
:"*- g 
*- c . 
l/l u c 
: 41 o 
o£x 
fog 
■5 ts 'c 
^x« 
äo o 
1-5 co 
re B \r> 
i) f- ■" 

« r> g 
*S? t=( X 

._ vj — 
52 UJ uj 
X O I 
K O (- 

S 4) 
•■2 s 

1-9 < 

.Ä 5. w XT' 
w x ac^? 
e <" -a Bt 

V 
»Sji 
00 — 
.S c g 
Cog 
3 *. 
41 3 i-< 
«is 
41 
° £-o S 
» S 4) 
^«8 5 6 
<" . ff, 
«J.S c 
u 
_. ft 4) « 
§•2-°- 

- 41 J>^ 

« I X! = 
■S C w ^ 

41 Cf 3 X 
X] rt — 60 
■*•* u„ 4) US 
TJ O X » 

5 w "" ■- 
« X c 
41 
- — 41 _- 
h »a« 
>EOG 

.$2 o ■= ■£ 

ft 1 

4> 
^^41 
S-Sft 
_ « 
> oo 
81 

M 41 
« 
ft 

4) ** 
•s >^ 
o o — 
•"a 

4) C 
JB « 

re +J 

s ~ 
ft 

W o 

< 4) 

to ^ 

ftl . 
5 « o 
_ ft ft 
c n 
u ü S 
XX — 

41 ' =4-' w 
£ = ° « > 
2 O 41 XI o 
5 s 4i 
K 5 a O 41 

r < 

ft to« i! 

> 
'S 

5 d 

oo 
c 
41 

111 * 

4» "S 
> x 
o oo 

o c 
c o 
_ o 

£g 
« 4) 
41 S 
u "5 
cax 

>% 
x. 
41 
1* 
& 
an 
c 
0^ 
u 

X » 
w 
41 
•^ £ 
Wl 
M X 
a 4) 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 17 

201 

JS o «-s c - 

B 

_ ä ii * 
^ Q.-C a 
5 ««" ? 
fa c ^? ° 
i Er as -a „% 

£ a 5 C o 

u 8 
« .si 

sll S-Sjg 
•OS », Ho 

o * 

V 41 ,S J3 "O T3 
<S JS D — C « 
* «)£ OD« v 
*T =9 — B ... u 

.5 « 
OB u 
u JS 
■s-s 
u a 
■5 3 
o e 
•a s 
c o 
»a 
fa 
5 c 
o 4> 

3 OS'S C.-i 5 
« M i .-S S .2, 
00 S! ■" VI ft T3 
Jr.3 3 81" 

3 JS rt^^-O 

4) o 

— o 
a — 
o TI 
4) «J 
■* a 
"2 l- 
a u 
1) "o 

5 •> 5» u <u « 
? u > a si 
C vl bJ=t! 
op- 8 
— y ai o 
<- .ts t5 'S a 
JS >,.S c ^ 

o 
JS 

« B 
E 4> 
§ 2P 
« 2P 
■sl. 
•H-S 
VI 1) 
JS E 
a. a 
13 _• 
fa JS 
«.ts 
■« ü 
4> fa 

E o 

«52 

op «I 
S a 
•go : 

4> 
JS 

3 8 
a, A 

u n 2 S w 
o 'S O « 
■*" 13 ~ 

°5 s 

a B 

rt ^ — 
[^ u 
- u 5i ö ^2 > 

■§ ts s 's S I- a o 
.s u 5 u o « u « 
sStll§ US 

3--TSH-"U!2CA 
o 

o 

u u « 71 . 

u 3 
M "u-Sffg 
u 
«Sa0 
.= Ü 
eo > 
0) 71 
o 
u 
S u 
00 
o > — ** 
o 
— ffl JS ~ 
11 O U a 
.- _ <u J3 *: £ ~ u 
^ •— j- ■" "> u . . 
3.2-J3 « <U >,^ 
Js 2. is .ts Q.JJ -j; 3 
oi o ^ 
E 5 8 
u •- o c ,** Ü *» ^ 
u 

? jl «9 .5 -3 g Q, 
00 „ , 
B u j; -r 
> O 00^^ 
oo£ *? -a 
«•«.sS-g 
ff.r --j a 
71 'S*« fa 
a S 
JB ° « S 
'£ ab 
QOo 
o ■ 
*3 O 
^|>« 2 a a^ii 
5 ^ .a, §: »<-2 «> a- S. 
7i fa ^» n u 0,?a a -s 
38u5<a-ae,3 

< 3 O -S O n-J3 4) Ä 

3 8 st 

. 4> 
4) JS 
« s 
H ® 
fa. « 
°ö 
SS >. 
o -a 
0£ c 
—. <9 
C. 3 

3 O 15 

'3 o 

00 

S JS 
o ° 
,fa «1 
fa. yi 

Sl 
"3 ^ 
>4 « 
JS 
« C9 
00 VI 
B 4) 
"SO 3 
21 
<J a. 

2 JS u 
'c 00 <u 
S3 go. 
■a fa 
sfj 2 

w 00« 
J== 3 

* 4) — 
fa B3 a 
> 

71 O — a 

•a •• > M 

J5 « o« 
B * JJB 

7i JS s 
,ti OO.S 13 
3 ^ 
1) o — « 
S E B V 
7i u y«u 
OOQS 
a) 7i « ^I 
J= a* 

.i? oo 1> 

s 

9 
11 

f 

(J 
S 

^ >>13 fa 

°» § U JS 
eo E *• 2 

X 

u 
2 o 
a 
o 

B 

o 
00 s o 

a. 
a 

13 
U 
JS 
JS 
3 
OS 

a. 
13 

a. 

0) 71 
*^ 

e
p
a
t

h
t
i

w

e
h
t

e
h
t

4) 
JS 

-
e
s
o
o
l

'S <" 
4) o 
o 
4) 13 
'S. 55 

f
o

e
d
i
s

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
n
e

f
o

f
I
(

2 

s
i
h
t

e
n
i
l

-M« 
*■* 

p
o
l

d
e
l
e
h
h
t
- 
•* -5 £ a .7i 
.2 ^ a o a fa — 
0) > 
- j^> 71 t- ° U f» 
f> u 4) > .3 0 
^3£ 

-S3 
4) ~ 
fa •"• 
3 V 
U JS 
U *- 
"» >» 
U JS 

3 s^ 
3i? « 
J) B o 
*2 E ** H 
S 
«2 u 

S 3 
1/1 o 
.§•§ 
? 1 
00"" 
E 13 
2>S 
« u 
° 5 
- "'s35 

„ 71 E ° . 
71 -tS — 71 71 2 
3 ^ vO U S? JS 

O o 

•a 
2 E 

u 
13 — 
« S 
U i 
fa ao 
JS s 

it 

5 3 
1 0013 ^ 
C «CO 
._ U 4) 

c 2 JS 

J3 -2 
71 i 
71 >> 
1 4) Jrf 
O O 
O 'S , 
B 71 

<*- 5 2. s 

Q C 
a. «a 

«j (j ü A 2 

<U 71 o 
S. E Q «J 
a.2 •:: 

JS 

J="S «JS1 
i s-s.» 
5- u a. t« 

r: 2, 
l 13 1) 

4) 
•o. 

o 

IS? 
> 
_4) 
t> u 
55 
u » 
71 g 

B J3 
.2 71 

00 1) 
, S JS 
'00 e 
!B o 
JS 4) 
.» u 00 
4) « 'S 

y «^ 

«§£? 
JS 19 U 

6 5 
71 S^ « 
18 « °! 

.2 S-B 
* a I 
.2 3 2 
71 W^S 
« • 3 
-On 

*B — ü 
S5 S 
«OB 
$S 5 u 
2 g oo 
T5«0 
s13-o 
a « S • 
.2P«S wo 
go*» 
= §S.a 

Sjy'^ö. 
a°0.5 
58 O 13 4) 
■*^ _ fa ~ 
<-> fa <9 3 
o 3x « 
»'S», » 
t/5 fa O CQ 

•O -O JS 
3 4) *J 

'S i-g S- 
8 § u^ 
2 « 2P 2 
u S £0.2 

fa-O §)■§ 
« g'a 4> 
3 2 

•SJS 
|o 
S -3 4> 
U S JS 

4) 

3 &O ^ 
•9 2-a a 
£>£o E' 
■° « «-2 

4> JS H « 
■S g JS 

1-" 
O 4) 
^« 
O 00 
!9 ^, 
S.S 
O y- 
00 — 
.2 § OOJ^ 
??JS .2 o 
5 «5 - 
JS O J3 >> 
us a ,5 
fa 71 fa S 
o « >, 5 
Cti O.J5 71 

a *; 71 4) 

.318,* 

g -o o .2 
M '« 4, tS 
fa «t aojS 
u _ cs a, 
JS § ■« „ 
° 71 4) £• 
fa 4>— 2 
g js 71 J3 
w O E 4) 
- E 4) JS 
fa — 71 *3 
o-Z JS 2 
*o g-o 
ofljs a« 
c a S « 
.t; t- fa. 2 
fa «9 o B 

,: 71 U u 
4) 41 ^g J3 
&« M2 
^?! K--B1 
M g I 00 
s S g Er 

S3 « « 
IS. 4) J +S -^ 

sills. 

Q X 8 « -a 
1- 2 4) 4) 
_, 4) JS JS is 

O c9 o (fa 3 
it, a.<N o fa 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS, Page 18 

202 

o 
E 
cj 
b 

re 
to 
CJ 
> 

■** 

V 
X 
oo 
c 
•o 
c 
0) 
B. 

to 
to 
T3 _; 
«.£ 
« « 
5; co 

5 a. 

L* 
•u 
^> 
x 
3 
C3 
•o 
CJ 

3 
CJ 
£ 
a) 
u 

a. 
o 

x 
o 
c 
c 

53 O 

c -o 
o s 
S CO 

'= 5 
.2 o . 
s> i « 

O C-X 

5 = ° 
s ° E 
i 8S 
JTE..2 
-' O 1) 
C «5 X 
5 is i 
•c'l g 

>, i- CO 
Ä *>X 

« — c 
's ü T 
to - 
CJ .S E 
u to s 
" M x 
• — CO T-. 

*-*• B OJ 
CJ "" *- 
x w o 

cj a E 
-j E o 

0) 5 
x> •c 
£ o 

u. _fj 

5£ 

^ u °" 
CO j= g 

u g 

- o " 
•° S" 
ES 
es aj 

CJ 

CO 

c 
0 
«J 
JS 
66 
^5 
CJ 
R, 
5 
U 
XI 

X 
CO 
•e m 
e « > 
f « 
CJ CJ 
«. X 

E 
'5 

69 e 
e 
& 
m 

to to 
cj c 
o o 

00.£ 
u ■** 
co u 
x J> 

co 
X 
u 

1 

s u. 

CO 
I) 

o • 

CO f) 
" 3 
3 X 

*s =*> cj a 
x ^ 

>> 
c* 
> 
o 
a 
V -w 
X CO 
^ ■o 
o CO 

• CO X? 
-fa 2 
s a, 
52 « 
E t- 
= o 

' b B 
X O 

o n 
u 
a « 
K TJ 
OJ 
c 
3 3 
O 
v u 
> x 
oo*" 

CUD» 
V X Xj "P 

"5 *" "" C8 

CO 

CO > n 

o. o c 
- — O0 CO 
£ 
CO c 

CJ x; 

X 
. to 
o ■? 
CO 4J 
C>H CO 
Ü 1- Ct< 

CO 
CO 
.E c 
»•2 
•f " 

60 r£ 

2 M !l 
g£ 
c 
CO CO 

o JS 
is u 

■^ Ü 

1) w 

"O 
c 
3 
X 

0) 
X 

■o 
b. c 
V CO 
> 
to 
w-1 > 
o V 
5) ■D 
60 
u C 
D Of /—^ 
O CO "O 
T3 X V 
< u 60 
X X 
u 

X 
X ■^ 

0) 
u 
0) o 
-^ c B 
I) Ü c 
or 
CO 
u u u 
X 00 7 
u M i. 
O ~ ^ 

E g 
|'S 
.E^3 

•I "5 
3 . 
£ ^ 
CO u 
E| 
c w 
.2T> 
CO o 

0) t3 
X « 
o.E 
b to 
O 60 
c 

fr. CO 

s2" 
ÖS 
»'S. 

— _Z «i K 

0) »i 

3 4) 

o ig 
a " 
'!« E 
g-1 
r- ta 
, & eo.-s K 
S-5 * » 
s .H « 
.S: to -H *- go 

■§ a E .2 
5 °1 S S 
- ft8x 
tä** -3» 
S S «■- 2 
*■ ■= = I g 

•O O CO CO © 
C= X l) 
««i2 .5 - B 
o 2 
-^ CO *^ fe 
c c ^o5 
CJ do cj ,'t; « 
E .E E ~ MI 
3 to 3 s e 

S x S o IU 
.« a» .3 &. oo 

I" 
3 io 
CJ c 

C X 

v oo i>' 
o?5g 

^ E ! D 

Jill 
■SS"*.*. 
s.«ls 

0"0 >■ is 
^ B *J CJ 
a <»•£,«■ 
o ej .- cj 

o CO 
■" x 
u u 
m CJ [O 
■2 X CJ 

5*5 8- 
E-c E 
S c = 

•o 
CO 
CJ 

CO 
60 
B 

£.Ss • 
00*" to 
~J >, CJ CJ 
— CO Q.X 
«> & M u 
(^ CO ■- 
■3 -g x co 

■o-S-a 3 
sv = o 
3 -^ CO x 
O — to CO 
~ -a 
JSs 

i>. 

to b 3 ^2 
a. CJ B -v 
u 8 5 5 Cu 
E O0 o B O 

CO j- *j 

m ^ CJ 
cj c oo 
X P 3 

& c "P. 
ECO B 
CO 
3 CJ . 

ü Ü 

CJ > 
'So 
o 

r CO a 

CO 

"So 
3 
o 
E 

E 
CJ x 

CO 
cj 

X 
&0 
3 
o 
B 

■o — o 
c o *- 
« -0 to 
- CJ tj 
OJ > c 
.3 O O 
> E u 
7 CJ 
60.£> K 
E -g (N 

- '5 « u 
oj r > CJ 
a. oo g x 
«EX — 

B 5 = CJ 
3 X ,E fc- 

T3 CJ ■— 
CO JÜ ^ 
CJ to 
X « 

CJ *. 
ao co 
5 o 
"5 so 
o.E 

■&&| 

x Ex c ^ x^ 

B. to 

CJ 
CD 

"a. ax 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 19 

' ^?^tiam*ffi 

JSSgMp"; . 

203 

sv' ' 

■S3 o 
s 

5) 
S 

> 

a1« j5 u «j 

</) - u] u 

I/IS* t( 
3 s 3 § 

O* B 
a "T 

■o o a. ° 
Ö «•= 3 O 
K c -a u u 
. o.'S — =j ä 
.s •"■ a « 
» (9 VI 
A ul C 

U -n 71 -C 
2 a 
hjS S I) 
" a 
o o u JS a 
s 
. 3 a ** _ 
o -0 '" 5S JE 
0) 
eg» « « 
-=3 *.S = 

= ^" J! ,2 "5. £• 
■a<' 
O v) E-i rt 
s «J: 
o 
00, 
— Ä u « <« B 
a u T3 — o u 
«ft "" CS N g 3 

t! '> *-S .T- 
" ^ s * 

.2 G u -S 
•a rS 2 

.-2 3 u a 
* -° - »r 
•S* . a 

■a O « _ y 

I- o « *- y 

■-• 4-* ,t-t 

*S"S u2.£ 
8 Ö ^* a 2 

^ -s 1 <* * c 
s es .a « «I 
B ü « -*- X 
a — u ^ oo-° 
-a -S -B — B _- 
"205E 
u ts B -a 
so« 
J= o 
= 135 
ä o 
ui > 
o 
S at 
Q.-r u 

o « — Ms 

OS -a a 

« 2 ""S o 
3 *" <2 <a<"~ 
n ^ O 71 
«?„TJ - T3 
3 £?S u g 

,"** M "1 _c" ^5 

■J* 

« 

6 « 
c 

T3 
U 
71 U 
" c 

— 3 ^ 
71 .£> -™ 
«* - 5 

S .O 

— Si 
2 ■ *" 

o 

u 

'S 2 . 
1 V. r- 
1 'J. K 

O ' 

±1 :>.-» -S 

t 3', » 

3 >> 

G ^ 
a 
■3 > 
1) •- 
• Ma 

■ ag 
la... 
_: ~ Ü 2 
§ s ;§ s 

« ^ 1) 
u 
-a 
•s 
o 
a. 

u "j "i >^ Cu"oj;l3 

u . o o . 

5 15 
71 *- 

0) O u 

«9 « a H 
'-) -o c w 
>> 
CQ 5 

C5 -* 

c <S o 

- 2 » 
J4 a so 
= 1 

— T3 

V) •t) 
« <u 
u 3 
7] & 
K <u 
a. JS 
a 
MS 
.a 8* 
a,— 
o. <u 
2 'S «i 

« & 
■2 » 
.S Ö 

71 —" 

■s s a 
5 O = 

O 3 
£-= 

J J3 

ao o 

— 3 B 2 "B 
» 2 0 
e - E 

« -a! 
w 71 

o o< 

■-5 
71 —■ 

2 a *• 
2 B § 

a 3 
« P 

2 a 

•a •* • 
■5 — a 
■3 *.£ 

«8 

X 

2 
"3 
X 

© 
X 

2 § 
*-■ TO 

5 *- 

"H. 9- 
o o 
os 5 

© *o *i CO TO 

■^ CO (D _B *W 

■d . 

u © 

£?» 
2 £ 

^•5 
'S "o 
-« © 

*a - 
© 5 
© ^ !r 
3 « ü 
O >> 
CH © © 

s.ff 

0) •© © 
x re 

fa 
8 

© u 
re H 

© c 
x re 
•8 5 
"Is 

re w 

w s> 

H 

> o 
© JS 
JS Cfl 
re 

"2 -J 
E © 
S Ja! u 
4) 3 
!•? 
'S fr 
X "O 

S " 
u. 
^ 2 
© 'K 
X c 

±s © 

O 

U X 

ff" e 

©:J 
-»- re 

3 ■"- 

re « 
3£3 •** 

eS &> 
S 
o 
>•> 

«-'?; 
3 2 
O "O 
>> 
x! ao; 
.'S c 
i '5b, 

> 
© 
fct. 
fas' - £ 
Dug 
5 .fee. 
© , © 

^© 
0> JS 
J» *"' 

DC W> 
c c 

f 2 

s 

o 

LÜ 

= J5 i 
53 U "O 

31 

1) 4) 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 20 

*J © 
•- c 
•o -o 

Si © 
ao > 
re w 

e = 
*Z fr* 
.Sis 
o w 
s 
X . 
i, © 
•a ~ 

&* 
. ao 
o .s 
a ao 
JS jS 

J^g- 

k^ 
© 4> 

SE 

It, w 

CJ re 

« —I 

re e re 
.s s 

S3 w 
.5 4> 
u ™ 
a. u 
« u 
« to' 
. u , 

ao v 
S3 w 

53 Xl 

re E 

< 

2 

& 
e 

> 

5 § 

re yj 

fe ao 
^.5 
« >. 
4) -a 

g " 
ao c 
5 o 
£ £<•• 
I 8 > 
gg.« 

£ k a 
♦-C)© 
(/)«>> 
.a js »j 

re 
3 u 

4) 
X 

3 
O 

E 

ao 
c 

c c 
u re 

c Ü« 
4; 5 
(A TO 
u c 
*2 "° 
E « 
4> V) = 

3 

^ c 

i£ 

J- flj 

I » 
s° 
U ä 
re 
**• f*5 
C u -C 
o o c 
•- re 
o fs • 
rt\ ^^ 
Ü (- m 
oi M 
*- te .5 
a * 2 
JS "O "S 

xi 5j u 
» O* 
™ u re 
■BtE 
Dug 
S^«= 
J « 8 

^ J» 

ü 'S 
apj^ 
.5 « = 
c ~ - 
U O 3 .5 

a 
B 
Id 

c 

_o re 
™ w re 
^ © u 
•° B, tn 

•Si 
re re Era 

Xi 

•go» 
& ^ » 
TO .. .*-< 

re 

TOO*- 
eoJ= «> 
c & .5 
o o 
3 
« s: 
■C 
< S3 

c c 

ao c 
in © 
•" c 
re JS 
üx 
*- c 
« c 
•a re 

5 I 

204 

05 00 

i> .E —■ 
00 -^ « 
■" _ 4) 

|2 

'<S ao 

I 8 

•c o 
ao °- 
|T) 
5 re 
■S ig 

« .H. 
ZJ 
v 
II 

§1 

8 I i 
~££ 
■ ha . 
Ä-5 ©" 
'S.S-o 
ÜB *0 TO 

TO 5 
1— yj 

•2 a 
u 
4) 

— 3 "f 
42 x • 
05 .tS 
- a 4) 
c 0 - 
•2 « 5 

w o J> 

u © 
C 4) 3 
*" u O 
?« -25x5 
x B- 

lE-a 
^ » s 
Kg« 
5 » £ 
re ai 
III 
t- 1 

g re ■= 
o o c 

"*• 4) 

ao »j 
3 4) 

re 

C 
V 

'£ 
1 
4) © 
■o *" S 
u 3 J£ 

JS >> 

re g 

25 

re "~ 

c re 
re ö 
S o 

x "O 
c 
x> a 
3 © 
4> ±3 
4) ■£ 

re o> 
re J= 
CS 05 

!3 fe u 
re ? *n 

,t! OS -o 
s || re 
© 
eg« 
.2x E; 
U u u 
4) J> c 
05 Gu.3 

3 X 
O t~ 

4) X 

■o 
c 
> ao 
re 
4) c » 
o S i> 
4) > > 
*- re •> 
5 « i? 
•°fj s 
2 *, o 
3 re ■" 
o x >^ 
6 X*4> 
4> r" = 
5 Sx 
"O xi x 
«S E t3 
og* 
4> O - 
6 oj "O 
w U 4) 
_E 03 3 
o o u 
•2 •□ J! 
X ^ u 
s © '05 

4! XI — 
> t: 
©•DO 
U « O! 
u tS ü 
•COS 
05 ^ X 

C X 
o 00 
s2 
4) X 
X u 
I-1 s 
1) — 
C3M-3- 

« \ « ro 

4> 3 
•3 2 

4) 
4> • 
X c 
.5 g. 
■" I 
"7 re 
.5 5 
"O 53 
x 
»iö? V 
re 
4f 

v re 
»« o 
re *j 
„4, 

w £ 

t3 ,© 
re >, 
Ü « 
D.X 4) 
3 "^ O 
© X 
T3 

O. 

03 
4) 
's/ 

C re 
IS 
^3 
re 03 X 
C ^, u 
re 
03 
f,J 
4) 
«J 3 

,j.. 

5^ 

^3 -M © 

x re 
.2 „ 

^H Xj 

oT « 
4) O 
•3 « 

a 
o 
,2 — _4> 
x 
re 03 "o 
£E 
E E- 
03 ^3 
o> c 
1) C 
■3 « 
X C3 
JS r^ -J 
H 

re go 
E -o i -2 

-C C g* 
Z^ w ? x 
as ■§ o 
Us 0 .5 

■o •© 1> 
V 4> "O 

.5 o 

« E-S 

O s 

o !a> 
'w Si 
«°S-5b| re 
o S - 
05 '"" 
'5b 
re 

t
n
e
t
n
i

;
s
g
a
b

n
a
h
t

d
a
e

b

t

x 4> 0 a 
0 re 4) ac 4) 
■C © « C •ji 
5 o?^* # 

"■ 4) 3 .>- 
>,■= '" re 

4> 
S3 c £j^ 3 
c •- > 3 an 
ä "> © » s 
k,S »s 4) 
° ~ 1. O X 
e
05 
o
b
w
b
u
c 
r
0 ao ;; x 4J 
c S 4> X 
X 4) « C & 
TV~ 3 0 
s © ° 

a
h
t
h
t

d
i
m
u

t

r

)
s
g
a

o
D

(

c
u
m

e
h
t

o-P^.2 T3 
■ 'T: W J= TO 
- -1-* _stf T3 w 

4) 
J* 
O 
3 
X 

>i 

J= c 

1*- o 
0 13 
4) ao: 

13 S3 
4) re 

2 g 

3^ 
re »o 
. 4) 
© O. 
o S 
X 

•SS 

S-s 

ao — 
x "S 
_U O o 

"03 re © 

c re "© 
«Ä « 
— .2 x 
o 05 x 
03 re y 
c ^™ re 

ao"o 
E "7 
■5 T3 
S| 

XTJ 
re 
ao 
© 
re "O 
■° 5 

03 Ä 
re - 
"©.= re 
!-* 
■sl 

re &< 
co 
t- o 
° x 
C i_ 

3 © > 

4) O 

D, 
3 re 
© ^ 
~ © 
ao 05 
c o 
© u 
i © 
10 '5. 

o o 

0 

0) e 
W5 & re 
"re s 
E re 

>- © 

8S 
o 
« S2 
re 3 
""x 
© n 

2 ° 
3 Ch 
re 
x > 
ao b 
3 © 
x « 
JS & 

X 
ao 
c 
•0 
3 
© 

^j 03 

in c 
© re 
© - E5 

O J^P 
JS "Öc 
*- s 
c c 
TO (A 
5 „ 

© *i 
^ 3 

© .£ 

* E 
re c 
© «1 
ao1- 
»«,0 03 Ä - a 

© 
X x 

V 
Ü 
^ 3 
O-O 
© 

3 03 w X 

03 C ' 

8 g> 
II 
^1 
3 = 
E « 
E~ 

re o 

3 2 
0 5 
x> « 
re 
u +J 
u © 

© "o 
E 3 
.2-° 
*o © 
re -ß 

^8 
^ 3: 
x4 
•e E 

0 £ 

ao 
3 
o 

o?~ 

■* 00 
•o re 
re JP 

re x 
"2 &> 
o "3 
.is ^3 
'o o 
re 5 

n > 

«. 
o 
2 c 
a 
00 _- 
£ a 

re •o 

3 £ 

DO)*' 
x .■= » 

re JS 

X JT fc. 
c ° 
s " © 
n 05 x 
■o •= X 
>>l£ 3 

c ft" * 
01 Sx 

lu J* .- 

t! re u 
« . n 
s-ll 

re S5 © 
^.'^ ~^- 
•S aoj: 
= -a £P 
X t- '■" 
re re s; 
? « 
© -71 u 

ao 
c 

ab il 

T S3 ao 

3 _ ao 
o re ff 

■o 2 
acg 

BOX 

.y S 

re (3 x 

•O S3 
© ^ IS 
2 a 5 
2 3TJ 
" w S 

0 
ä 

■ - 3 

£ « re 
JS -^ w 

G © .S3 

ao re 
re © 

o Ü 
u 
& 2 
© 14. 
U 
ao 
3 

© ■£ 3 

•a x ^> 
11 si 

■o X 
>> o 
x „ 

w © ao 'S 
•o 
c 
re 00 
•- 5 
© o 
re x 
o. o 
•o.S 

•o 
© 

3 .re 
© 5 .. 
a •« c 
.w a. o 

00 
c 

X « 
<* &, 

3B.T1 

•2 c re 
5 « 
© 2 
© E 2 
X rt 03 
o =r.E^ 
w © 13 
-2 * K SS & i 
© y re X 
•n ~ r « 
ai .£ o c 

re 
^_, 
X 
ao 
E 

© 

•o 
c 
re 
o ^-* re 
a 
.SS 00 
h re 
a x 
S3 2 
0 -K 
ao re 
.5& 
TO f- 

x 

© 
J< 
o 
3 
X 

2 
u. 
u: 
re 
u 
ao 
L. re 
x 
O 

U* ^S TO 

4> CO 1 

S & o 

S"5 

«'S 

re .© 
x ia 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS, Page 21 

205 

ul 
K 
3 

Ö0ÖÖÖ09 

döobdöb 

51 9 9 O ^ ^* 9" «~ 
i X 
If «• wr» <» tf» » K 
u 
2 « 
O 
«i 
4 > 

v e 
im. 
11 c- W <* 1© P* Ö» «" 

K 
UJ 
t- 
Z 

3 

» X «0 w es iA o- fv H 
ff- =«• W P* CT <« 

5 

til 
fck 
s 

s £ g E e e E 
e e t E E E E 

4> »l ;; 4) 

1 S S2 S -a 
^^ S* a 
° '« 9*'S «c 
ÜÖ «3 GJ -M 

M«»% 
B -M St « S 
.B .Si 4) ut O 
■O JS .O b 
8"-2* 
O 
c a 
.S M 
4) 
4> 

asS-a^js 
afa 5^ ** 

a ! .5 JB | g> 
a 
*2 4) S a 
— ao a •- 
3 _ 
■M 4) 

4) -w 

a 5 o o 

4> JZ 

o 
Z 

: s 

4> -M J: 4> * .. 

ss2»S.S 

3 -■§* v § 
g S 4) "O 
3 S* 
S -So» 
c 
a^So 
a 
S3 « § £ 'S 'S 

^JSigS 

s fa 

u 
JS 

1 « 
a.p. 
X « 
as 
■»I 

■H C 
4> o 

4> j». 

as 
fa 

a. 

u 
JS 

M o 

's h « t » * • 
o 4) 3 a 
+i o a +±; 
A _c 3 ^ 
_ "> St 

■sS« 
s 2 S *? t) 
Jj 3 S 

^£ «Ja >; 
i ** 8 8"° 
;s *«-« 
' 4j 5 u « 

Ci<N 

E 8 §J2 § 

S u5S g 

|| .a^-3 
■5.1 2« 3° 

4) 
JS "O 
*• a 
w 5 

S 8 B 1| 2 1 
■sslf a 

a vi 
5 u 

I V3 4) 

«a *• s 4) 
js o a s 
» S"3«ö 
I « 1J iä 
" 8' E 8.-2 
üi33 2 a< « 
o 
a"0 
o a 
.. ötSOS-S o _ 
2 § S «2 JS p « 

o «2 «'S « «'"2 
: -2 >. 8 « S« 
■S _ 4> 
m JS 
>>E>tsJ34),. OJ 

s*~i _e ^i «^ i ■« y 
4) 

£** JS-6 
H 
§| 2 2 JS«g 2 

2 Js "* a 

j« 3 S o J 

<£ a« 8 3? 

• «■* S " o 
s 8^«-a 4. 
!*»- M S g 

-™ a « 
« o o 
Jj=3-g- 
J= o— I 

J.S 

^S-üJ^"1^ aC 
1* 

4) 

• 5 •« -2 «*. ss 
5 § a o o « 
■g .a 2 3 a 
j 2 w „ O JO 
1JJ8.S 
s o 3^ a S 

4) S 
U U 
IS fl 

a a 

>,a « *. 
« o « * 
4> •§ 4) 
4> ta JS 'O 

!2— 4) g 
D. a 35 a 
u « u 
i.S « E 
8 4. g£ 
s.ai 2 

4) ») >, w 
8-t *J i— *"" 
■* i^ ij «- 
00 2j> 
a "> S 
,S 4) .3 - 
00 00 X ™ 

JS 

u al 

US«' 
•- S ao 
»-■a a e 
o o «^ 
■as . « 
8 8 4) 
4)"g O K 

i> a w 

■2 a g « 
ö C9 

4) «tt. o . 

4) 

2 a « «. 
. k. 
4> JS 
S o.' 
a. & J2 Q- 

2«-S«. a 
JB** 
* « oo 
2 «a« 
4) a w a a 
£?aSo| 
2 "a a -C 3 

'S "a JS I 8 
' S^£ 2 4) 

4> 4) 4> 4> 4» 

E35S3 

4> 4> a 
.s a 2 
« JS -t*i o. 

S 8-1.3.5 
^^•a< 
V) 4) ■- 
"J S3 o 

>a 
00B 

a 4i 

a- « S-E 
•■3 S 2 §•. 
2'€^a I 
a > Z > M 
o „w »*S • 
2" 4) >-^ _ 
13 JS a >5 
>M *• . a « 
2.s|j^ 

4> «I O "* T, 

= u] 4> 

°JJS 

la *l «I 
.Ho Mj3 a© 
l3lS1^8 

..* w ej «*" oi 

g =| is v. .5 « 2. 

a. SS « -2 1 a «} 
o JS « B S a M 
HO ftfto h B 

f> « 60+5 

3 3 O 

JS O Vt 
a a, 
2 
& --'S a 
■a-OS'S 
eo=>fa S 

JS tj 4) an 

II a1- 

8 »i'j» 
g£ « 2 

8. .is 
5 i «:a 

«> *B JS »4 

". JS 
13 &i.: 
' o 
3 
° • Ü - - 

6 > is a _ 
B-g >. «-fa 

*> 9 5 •£ u 

■g-g 

V) 

- Ld 
yi 4> 

s s 

4) 4) 
•O — 

Ja « Se 

si u 
SO a o 

. 4) 

4) 
00 73 

«OS 
JJ u « 
■SflO 
2 a s 
js a o 
sal 

S 4) 

1 4) — . 
SS3S 

« G S 
« * a 

«- s 
cd 
4> "1 
■a ., 
■w 4> 
,5 >,- 
J3 
2-- 
,JS 
"1^ s 
1*1 ^ r^ 
-&£ 
§*- 
ir! « 3 
ao 4) «I 
S^ toe 
<" — c a 
T3JS--S~ 
W 4» 2 JS 
« 2 J.ts 

% a 
« u 
II 

« 
tS.2 
o -o 
2 ?> 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 22 

206 

u 
E 
o 

4) 
S s 

''S 

.3 3 
C3 O 

y 

* .2 .2 2« ~ w j> S J! & « 
c « 42 

5 u 

o 
Q 
e 
.0 
*>.... -s ■- u - 
8 2 2"las ■ o " I 
'-J3 
es 
'•3 
i 51^ Sulfat JJ 1 
es 
SS 
Iu<^ = .EE'a|S g3 8 

00 5 
3 S 
2 +* 
<u ad 

u " 4>as g sl-2 o 
S? " «as 8 5J#S o 
4) 4> w b S: 5J 3 

« <« o 'S •= 9< a 

■■■' ■' ,5 u 2 "° " -S o 
^83aJ« -s 

. J4 U ■** 3-3 3 g (*« 

ä 2 a. a s 3 IÜ 
<u > 
> es, 
es u 
o "o 2. -5 •> ° «J 2 S — 
o —« 
a E 
■8 u 
o«goSf^ss^ or 

*- 4> > <N w > «rf ES UflS C/} O 

4><N 
J3 -« 
** 3 

«I 

T3.S 

3 " 
gs 

E 
o 

& 
s 
et 
s 

00 

"3 
E 

tu 

«'S •« 
"5 4) 

45 o "o 

81H 
£ E 

« g>| 
JS .5 P 
"".£<*■• 
E »V 
sie 
w u *" 

•= 2 

E M"° 
S'g.S 
u*8 

bi ff « 
S ^«3 

< 8.2 

US <u 
es J3 

»O <N « ü 0) « 
■B u 2 3 * __ 

\ .5 
BÖT3 

5 ,- ao u ■£ 
- Mg 3 .2 

<" S 

S ''S 2 S äs 
O U - 
M * H""S 
'S -S J fc 's * 

« H 
u S 
_ O S 

u — 
E 3 

M3 2 « 
S » 

o 1 « JS -2 b 
S§ | S 8* 
« u g Ü.S w 
■*« rS e 5 
- * s < «i * 
ISS * S« 
■5 I g » 8« 
JJ SS 2£ „■ 
IJS S a50 S 
ü > E "o 
- Ja ri g -S ä 
•S .S a 5 » ,« 
« U _, M ~ S 

-t; « 
3 ^J 
'S »i 

■* 5 

III: 

ü • 
"° 'S E 
« n g 
Q- qj 00 
SS.2 

•O 4) 
s^: 

U +j . 
J3 OS « 
"v. U U 

S3*" 
« « 4J 
S-5 
Sa. o 
15 « a 
fel,«-- 
M* O 

" a 

_ 3 I 
a u -a 
3 4) 3 
§ C O 
■»• E 
.2 4> 8 
Jjlf 
a !SJ 2 
*" 2 I 
4> S B 
8 Ja 
■o .2 « 
u V 
Ä ü u 
*3 e « 
S3-St! 

3 
o 
u 
ca 

3 o 

o 

§.S 
0) o 

8 
k, o 

son 
8 3 
■21 

£ « 

SA 4) O 4) W "O 4) 
.3 5 T3 S -° « j> > 
4) 4>2« 3 ä>4) 
ffl -a > 2 o"5 « 
»'3 « s o » » 
. -o o P *" 

4) . 

J2 > C Ö »■S 

JJ i^-S; 

'33"« ,« . 4> * 
Ä - ^ g .> 4) 
^ w d) S B A VJS 
3 IS2 o S ü 
O 8 
5 o gss 8* J> 
. -«a td u ■ n 'u 
1 s S>^',,- « S_- a 
| g ao= *, * 2 o 
»g^0 1*5 go *" 

<!-ts 

PS s 
o o 
II E 
>. 
o »I 
(S •>. 
»^ 8 
>> CS 
JS 4) 
"O 3 
4) 
13 O 

:42a>,4)4)'-«-a_ 

3!ö«90««j20g. 

'S a E 
«3 S 

—. 4) 
«N M 4) 

-g & 
9ä so " 
ojS 

JA 8 g» 

£ o -a 
8|l 

M Cb 
t! I— 4) 
O « C 

rt 3 .2 

i 

E.2 gg 8S-2 

e a 

P 5 "3 a-5.2-° 
J3 _— a. 3 13 
E 4> 3 
Ko3aSbo 
"" b. O 

sog 
3 a 

u 
■" 'S-3r.4)4)u,«-1' 
an 
3 

3 ob*- £5 ° II 3 
«Ä 0<tS 4>C?H^ 
S\ .8 * J3 _ 

,^%'« 
> . o .2 "S « 

"3 

U 

E ■« o - 
3 SU-0« 

_» 4> 
^^ *• 
4) 4) 3 
> wl « 
« O O 
ü o. o, js * o,5-J -2 
b o uba tin o 

>, B >, 
bl m > 
41 0 
ta 
# S3 4) 
PS 43 
>v°0 % 
fN o 
3 
cfl o 
O 
> Ä 
« «2 
O.« 3 
TSS I 
8-2 « 
g-Es 
4> to 3 2 
8 O 3 
»-B2 
»»*; 

6 : s 3 
u 

0.35 -a 
.2 o J 

^j D bj 
IS S 4) 
2 u T3. 

T-i <N ^ 
u u os 

•gs» 

3 u u 

cS — ^ 

8JS 

is8* 
S a w 
•g-OOS 

« rt <X> 
a f-^ 
S «.>j 

»■O s 
o 4) a 
"aas. 
4> 
Sog « 
2 8« 
4) > 
5'S 
o ej 
Wl 4) 
bl bl 
4) 

4) 
OS 

CS 

*• 3 
00 ._ . 
3 8 ts J4 
3 O *j u 

's 
o 
„ja: ü E-ä 
«. 
<St3 J> 

8 s- 

I - 2 

«A3 
B ^ O 

e o~ Ja 
ü ™ 3 ^ 
> C O 3 
WS 5 8 

INSTRUCTIONS, Page 23 

207 

U -S tS B eU >>S3 ft B b 
_ q o «•-■S e-S-S 5 
ä a « 5 

'> a g co « 

B fe 8 « a 
oSo- 

•§ S S3 S 

O > ja — 
gun,. 

5 c 131 
o e a. 
as a *■• 
M U »i ü 

42.S-§^-""S'-il5 
&,a 
3 

Sä' 

ÖC2B'BtÄ^*iX 
° .5 a .5 a » tu a S 

■° a c X 
tu» S "» 
»5 5 §.,» 
.Sau 
ja ao a, 
"S 00 u B c 
•- 3 « "43 5 
•s o a a 2 
M U jjjg b 
s~ B S >> 
Ö op-5 8 -5 

a wi 

ü o 

£^ •* ** o > 

» « . tsa e 5 •- a 

•§1 SHM«S P 

3H Ma ij 

-- - - .'S n 
£ IM ^2 e J3 -c .s _ 
•5 'S § +* £ eu ^ 
» T * •£ >._Z 5 s 
a S A «"95 & 

2^-5 g. S3 a 

s .=: cu oo a 
.2 »* a .5 a 1? g 
■G a ■= cr S S's« 
«■° «a o S3 

a (U >. 

) £> OS 
0013 

S = 'S213 8 
t- §• a.5 * g 
aw.-. _r 
. ** ao a eu 
•o <w >5 ax oo 
•a •■■" ä *H 8- 
■a? « ft8 u 

to Q,*S co o 
.. ° et- c 
eu , 5 f *s B 
c i 3 e «b a 

■ « £• a 2 B 

u S a u * 

t*> U =3 M S 
tu a * _, Ä 
- — _ c u 

u > 
>> 

CO 

z 

O 
Q 
Z 
M 

« "is.ä 2 
o eu -S jj 
°o>M*.S :<3!!-§--§Su«5\2 

2 "« ** ~ -. * 

CU *** B " »-r " 3 00 
S aa a « -2 4» 5 a 
aBeu:a<1-e-a--; 
«I« :•=!-! 
4J — o -M 5 <U ■* 
CO a N • X — .. 
3 -3 « -g .2P S3 •§ | 
2o,S <" -J3 * « 

J; „ 60 CU *• X B . 
"• 8 .5 .S o j3 ° § S3 
.*.:.« a u+3i«ioS 
>> S a -3 a a « ä 
2 OT! St3 OX eu «> 
r*eUeuOcUa-tfX'B 
(O 

tu 

■O 
'a 
3 
u 
a<2 g 

,<-S 

■s- 

x«g 

«».5 "o "3 "" 

u^*'3 u u tu 

Six S2 a* 
*-2^'0 u52 S « ° S 

U.J-.S5 . ^^ >.- S X oo-S a*« 
co a es?'S-a* 
u 
a, 
u J 
i3-5SiäTsS43 
U O a ■" -B ,». 
ft55 o- ■§ S3.2? o 
.3 5 ul 
a > o " 
u a 
^■Sj^B0 
4) 5 v -M K » S3 
T3 "Q a a "* 
S a S V. +i 
Q, U <U 
5*50.5 _g.a 
a trj J= JO -a J4 
J3 o -iS u C" 3 3 

8 |9*§2<^i 
*t/l « 
c B s 8 221^.2 2" 
- S-" ^ a 
o .2 H Si •§ 
■5 §-s c.2-2 8 S3 .-5 
° S .3 ü -5 •- a S B 
SS'OOyS'aaa 
aSacÖ^D-Br? 
MX U C« t3 ki «U« 

,-ü., 2 « — ««««■sä 
» S. » ä S "Z. 2 Jo -S 
2 *- « *• .S .2 » - 

eu o 

«^ B ^ 
to •—. 2 i3 
*■• . OO ^ c 
8*8 2P~ « 
42 2 a u 

o x S 9P a 
o *3 a a a 

B »Jus: « 
ÄJÜ « 
«Sä .a 
to « e 

§ g ."2 S 1 S .S .2 t« 
S-SS" b 2.S I .. _ 
■3^-0^ b a .si s a 
Ä aoa>B>os! 
o. 
«-1— 5otot-s"0 
co 
a5tu"*-_3o« 
•■8 
tu js a o 
, <u "O 
> a °o 
. X tu tu 
a ü _ 
a ^3 — 
•w a .3 s 
IS S 
3-3 

,S ts ao^ 
_* a « a 
3 J. -c ^ - 
^ 3 O 

Sj-^-O 

a 
a jo 

a a.% 
a tu g 
BJ8| 

^•a «- 
>2 x 
■■C 3 ** 

6 » g . 
to a JS 
* ä « ta 
x«8« 

^ a * 2 s§ S'oHS 
?■»> — '■a'^a— a 

to cu cu ** *i to 
_u 2 x ü 2 j> ■ 

•a 

•a B 
3 
O a 
X 
to S 
CO o 
B 
a 
0- > 
3 
eu 
eu 
CO 
8 
& 
u 
X 

eu eu 
X eu 
a 
«2 

I'-lSlI-laa 
[2|8x"§l"§o I 
H a C?:05t-i a.aro"t3 

■a «nog 
S3 a j; <c 
^'B .. « 
S3 « a 
« "C ^. u 
'3 S O.Ü 
'C x tu .-a 
u to o« u 

E 2 ^ a - * 
u "O « a " a 
•0-2 g 3x j3 
.«■ to ^* t- cu 
to a _ -g cu > 
a o a a j- cu 
_ u a eu 55 So 

■3 ffl 
•3 u •= g <• 
« ^C <d p ü 

to O 
eu 
X 
00 eu 
X eu 
X 
CU u i 
a eu 
T3 B 
tu > a 
eu U 
u •o 

INSTRUCTIONS 
EXTRA PAGE 

,3Nil ONOivmo 

NVO 30 WV3S 3ÜIS 

,3NI1 ONOlVinO 

NVO 30 lfilV3S3CIIS 

LU 
CC 
ui 
I 
CO 
Ui 
> 
< 
UI 
_l 
5 
_ 
3 
7 — 
4. 
H 
■J 
co 
■? 
*| 3 UI 
oi 
LL 
.J 
-Jf < 
OC 
UI 
>U; 
_l 
^"' 
—' 
-) 
<i 
Q 
tr 
-J 
2 
O 
I o 
u. 
u 
CO 
a 
Q 
o < 
ai 
tr 2 
I 
a. 
H 
Z Z 
ui 
'"' 
1- 
< o 

-i 

«■ 

Q < 

Ui 
CC 
I 

ol 
O 
h- 
co 
CC 
O 
u. 
co 
Ui 
-i 
O 
I 

-f 

ui 
tr 
UI 
i 
CO 
Ui > 
< 
Ui 
-I 
5 
3 
Z 
I 
3 
-I 
< 
O 
z 
5 
_i o 
i 
co 
a 
< 
Ui 
tr 
i 
i- 
z 
ui 

< 
Ui 
tr 
i 
H 
a. 
O 
I- 
<o 

tr o 

u. 
CO 
Ui 
_J 
O 
I 

< O 
a. 
O 

I- 
< 
Ui 
CO 

+ 
\A 3HH03S 03dVl 

110N3d HONI-i 

V 

aynoas aadvi 
"IION3d HONI-l 

• 3NI1 U3J.N30 ■ 

/ 

— Ui . 
CC « Q 
T 3 * 

s |i 5 5 
5 "'S? 
'agil 

Q UI ■* O 

Ss»* 

8s£* 
«°*§ 
Q CC u.5 
UI u. « S -. 
CO 
3 
Ui 
_l 
m 
< 
i- 

Id k -J 

Q ■* W 

a 
< 
a. w 
LU 
J tr § cc 
>^9 OKI 
^ I U. CO I- 

■¥ 

UI 
K 

CO 
O 
a. 
X 
UI 
z 
< 
u. 
O 
_l 
< 
> 
AC 
UI 

1- z 

*- oc 

Sir 
Si 
<2K 

zee 

«T OC 

z ec 

«- oc 

Ui 
S 

UI ~ 
col 

z 
* 
u.' 
u. 
Q 

natoonioa 
O O O v «™ *™ *™ 
d d ci d ci ö ci 

r- SN « ^r if) CO 1». 
ö ö ö ö ö ö ö 

"* eo CN co o o r» 
d d «- r^ «N CN SN 

«0 t-; CO CM t»; «N 
«- M *i «0 f» d *• 

IN 
<9 N ffl Ifl r- fv P) 
*- «- CM CO CO "Cf 

E E E £ E E £ 
E E E E E E £ 
CN rr CO 00 O CM •>» 
*- T- F- 

il 
CO 
Ui g 

-I 
Ul 
Q 

<o 

O 

o 
1 

o 

K 52 
1 |i 

CC Z 3SS 
"235 
Q UI T 0 

ui u. « 9 - 

ui ^^2 

03 .^ Q -j 

1- Q 1 u. 

Ui 
CC 

CO 
O 
CL 
X 
UI 
Z 
< 
u. 
O 
_l 
> 
£ 
Ui 
1- 
Z 

UI 
S 

— 3NI1 U31N30 - 

O 
< 
UI i. LU 
^ 2E o t 
O O H I 
X u. co t- 

r 

CC« 
11 
«- CC 

niocoonifl« 
O O O T- 5" T- T- 
d d d d d d d 

Si d d d d d d d 

ZK 
15 
<? ec 

«a; oq oi co © d i"* 
d O i^ r^ CVJ CN CM 

2 £ C9 *=; CO CN r> w 

7" 

UJ s 
co X 
gee 

SN 
CO dl Ci> Iß r* i^ CO 
p- r- CN CO C5 <?T 

< 
a. 

Z , 
r Q <o 
u." < O 
U.UIZ 
5°=- 

E E £ E E E £ 
E E E £ E E E 
W ■* CO 00 O CN ^ 
r» 9— *— 

dOiMonsa Ni 8/s-i 
3aainoHSS3iOH 

^ 

< 
O I 
1- I 

^ i O O 
Zu. 

d0iM0138"NI 8/9-L 
3a cnnoHS S3HOH 

Q 
< 
ui i ui 
-J tr o = 
0 O H I 
1 u. co K 

NVO 30 INV3S 3QIS 
3Nii ONOIV ino 

NVO 30 

VVV3S. 

la/s 

"* 3A//T O Mr -7W / nt 

u. 

< 
o 
o 
< 
> 
cc ui 
-I 
O U 
LU 
tr 
LL tr 
D 
UJ < 
O 
N -I 
LU 
co O 
CO 
O 
ui i- C 
Q. O H 
< < LU 
X CO 
UJ _| 
LU -J 

o 
LU 
3 
.«8 
S T « 

< X H 
O g < 

5 ° to 
■* j- LU 
Q o X 
Z < H 
3 LU LL 
g CO° 
5 z co 
< £ UJ 
°i UI Q. 
< to 
=* < X 
O 
LU g 
I- 
H u uu 
tr X x 
ui h .. 
t "- s 
>: DO 

LU 
< 
z 
CC 
LU 
h- 

< 
a. 

M 

INSTRUCTIONS 
EXTRA PAGE 

PATTERN FOR CLEAR-PLASTIC COVER FOR KFM CAN 

o 
3 
i- 
UJ 
X 
H 
s 
o 
tc 
u. 
LU (/) 
1- Z 
LU oc 
-I LU 

0. I— s P 
o < o a. 
LU H x 2 « 
H O Z 
ILl-O 
o z> \z 
w <■> o 
Z LU "J 
OUE 

S § 5 
D < - 
9 = u 
a: «/> uj 
a. 55 X 
LU — t- 
e t ii. 
o • o 
££" 
Eo£ 
ft. u. * 
CC o 
u. 
en 
Z 
e 
UJ 
i- 

LU a 
< 
S Z 

< 

< CO 
et w 

UJ 
t- 
< a. 
< 
oc 
i- 
X 
LU 

CUT ALONG 
ENDS OF MARKS 
ALSO CUT ON 
THIS LINE 

CUT ALONG 
ENDS OF MARKS 
ALSO CUT ON 
THIS LINE 

llll|l!ll|llll|ll!l|IHI 

20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 20 

tu ■< 
X 
t- 
LU 
> 
< 
(A 

20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 20 

PAPER SCALE (TO BE CUT OUT) 

SHORT SIDE 

OPEN EDGE 

THREAD LINE 

8-PLY LEAF 

Q 
</) 
O z 
o 

THIRD-FOLD EDGE 

FINISHED-LEAF PATTERN 
(CUT OUT EXACTLY ON SIDE LINES) 

PATTERN PAGE (B) 

CAUTION: 

XEROX COPIES OF THE FINISHED-LEAF AND THE 
SCALE PATTERNS WILL BE SLIGHTLY TOO LARGE. 

jm-<L.- 

INSTRUCTIONS 
EXTRA PAGE 

H-l 
. «3 
CU 
rH rH 
rH 
•H CU 
13 J3 
4J 

<4H 
Cd C 
0) o 
rH 

co Pd oi 
W Cd CO Cd 
CJ 33 H H 
W HS<C 
HOHiJ 
Pi 

O Cd Q 
Q Z Pj g 
Cd H ■< < 
N > H 
MO « 
CO 2 Cn H 
1 WO Cd 
Cd Pi Cd 
S CO 33 
< Z Cd CO 
CO Cd O 
33 Cd Cd 
S3HO 
H P-l M 
H (Ü D • 
S Cd PS O Q 
PU Cd < 
CO <J 33 CO Cd 
WfuHH« 
hJ O 33 33 
O Cd H H 
Z 33 O 

5 H 3 O g 
O Ü Z 8 

Cd Z U O 
PS M Z 

prf W Q O 
r < CO < Cd 
Cd Cd 33 Cd P4 
05 H PS < 
Cd • 33 H 
33 S Z H 

O Cd Cd 
Cd PS 33 Cd 33 
tu tu H 33 H 
«Jj H 
HCK O 
; Cd • Cd H 
E
P
A
T

F
A
E
0
H « tJ 
Cd hH ^ 
33 «ON«*! 
H Cd M 

P
A
T

E
K

O
W
T

PH CO CO 33 
OS" < fd O 
Cd H O Cd «5 
> Cd a H 
OhH<H 
cj O Pu co < 

r 

. Tj 
cu cu 
rC O 
4J CQ 
rH 
J2 p, 
O 
•H CU 
J3"J3 
3 
o 
ß jj 
o 

Cfl 
•3 0) 
3 M 
■ 
cd H C 
cd 
cd 
3 ,3 cu 
co cj rH 
o 
CJ 
H 
tu cd >> 
rC o M 
cu 
4J iH 
u > 
Qi 4-1 
TJ O u 
•H <U a 
cu 
(0 rH 
3 1) Ai 
•H 

CU 
CU 
CU Ö0 43 
ja es 

4J 4J 
rH rH 
CO 
rH O 3 

T! > e 
& 1 .c -3 
4J 00 co 
cu 
ca in 
,3 ,3 M 
4J 
4= 
CU 4J 
•3 ja 
<u 
cd w 
0) 
A 
tu <ö u 
Ä W 
4J cd <u 
rH o 

EU 3 
,3 CO C0 
4-1 
•U 3 
•H u 
<a 
14H 
O O a 
u 

CO 
•3 
CU 
4J CU 
u > ■3 
cd n C 
CU 
& 0) 
co O. 
0) 
CO 
Ä -u 3 
CO 
H co 

3 e CU 
J3 
O TJ 4-1 
S 0) 
M T3 
M 
Z es 
CU 
3 <u 1-4 
< a o 
3 co <4H 
CU 
3 
CO H 
CU 
<u JZ 
JZ H 

^r? -J 

 
 
 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS 
EXTRA PAGE 

co u - 
CO CO 
Cd Z> 

CO u 
CO CO 
Ma 
-a < 

* < * 

< OS fe, 

z --.e-« 
O «Id 
CO 01 CO t 
05 oeoa p 
wa a i 
a o co 
< or 
SMZB 
nwNs 

M ec < < 

Ota« a c* 

3 O E- CO 
T M as 
- CO W Cd 
IMKH * 
' ~! Id ■« CO 
* * * < 
■ O B Z Z 

^r-^ 

^ MO 
B03fciJ->. 
f- H- a.; H O 

Old, £-| 0 

cd ao 

:zchcoo a: 
JO O W i-t P- Cd&. • f- 
■ > X Q < 

)t<OU<<ZJUH 
JQMJ os 
:z e- coco <su 
j <WM« • HZ 
: -as x a« IN 
-t-<HfclnaJB,fl 
-" << «p< 
< a 
 Bhi" 

EdCJ H U 
. . _ CSK <{d S 
Id SB 13 U to t* 
 az wer 
.use 

it. t*- a Ex e- 

-**!&. UH 
UM -x K 
CO Q1H3 
aw a a 
«C F- W CO 
. W 3 BN* OS 
«BZH HO =5 
^ ' B-v 
cocoa: 

u to 
CO J • 
< < » o ca a> 

z« 
escoNHmw 
SUQQ < K 
a e- < -e o * = 
016. W (d Cd CO 

CJ 6- £ 
*fe«: 6*£- z« < X 
"- t-« w 

Appendix D 
Expedient Blast Shelters 

IN'JilEASING IMPORTANCE 

The majority of urban and suburban Americans 
would need blast shelters to avoid death or injury if 
they did not evacuate before an all-out nuclear 
attack. As nuclear arsenals continue to grow, an 
increasing majority would need the protection of 
blast shelters. As much as 3% of the total area of the 
48 states could be subjected to blast severe enough to 
destroy or damage homes—depending on targeting, 
weapon reliability, etc. If blast shelters affording 
protection up to the 15-pounds-per-square-inch (15 
psi) overpressure range were available and occupied, 
people could survive the blast, fire, and radiation 
effects in about 85% of this extensive threatened area. 
Blast tests have indicated that the Small-Pole Shelter 
(the most blast-resistant of the earth-covered shelters 
described in Appendix A) should enable occupants to 
survive all blast effects at the 50-psi overpressure 
range—if built with the blast doors and other 
protective features described on the following pages. 
Calculations show that it also would give adequate 
protection against the intense initial nuclear radia- 
tion if improved in the ways outlined later in this 
appendix. 

The life-saving potential of well designed, well 
built blast shelters is a demonstrated fact. Millions of 
Americans living in high-risk areas would be able to 
build expedient blast shelters within only a few 
days—provided they make some preparations before 
a crisis arises. The following information is given in 
the hope of encouraging more Americans to make 
preparations for blast protection. Also, it may serve 
to increase the number who realize the need for 
permanent blast shelters in high-risk blast areas. 

Some informed citizens—particularly those who 
live near large cities or in their outer suburbs—may 

choose to build earth-covered expedient blast 
shelters in their backyards, rather than to evacuate. 
Going into a strange area and trying to build or find 
good shelter and other essentials of life would entail 
risks that many people might hesitate to take, 
particularly if they live outside the probable areas of 
severe blast damage. For such citizens, the best 
decision might be to stay at home, build earth- 
covered expedient blast shelters, supply them with 
the essentials for long occupancy, and remain with 
their possessions. 

Persons in 15-psi blast shelters would not be 
injured by blast, fire, or radiation effects from a 1- 
megaton surface burst 1 lji miles away, or from a 20- 
megaton surface burst 4 miles away. If an attack 
occurs, the area in which persons in 15-psi blast 
shelters would be killed by blast, fire, or radiation 
would be only about % as large as the area in which 
most people sheltered in average homes would die 
from blast and fire effects alone. 1 

The following descriptions of the characteristics 
and components of expedient Mast shelters should 
enable many readers to use locally available materials 
to provide at least 15-psi blast protection. Pre-crisis 
preparations are essential, as well as the ability to 
work very hard for two to four days. (Field-tested 
instructions are not yet available; to date only 
workers who were supervised have built expedient 
blast shelters.3) 

PRACTICALITY OF EXPEDIENT 
BLAST SHELTERS 

At Hiroshima and Nagasaki, simple wood- 
framed shelters with about 3 feet of earth over 
wooden roofs were undamaged by blast effects in 
areas where substantial buildings were demolished. 

209 

210 

Figure D.l shows a Hiroshima shelter that people 
with hand tools could build in a day, if poles or 
timber were available. This shelter withstood blast 
and fire at an overpressure range of about 65 psi. Its 
narrow room and a 3-foot-thick earth cover brought 
about effective earth arching; this kept its yielding 
wooden frame from being broken. 

WBSfSm 

1 • *iäü* 

!«Üi 

nuclear surface burst were produced by these 
chemical explosions. 

Several of these shelters had expedient blast 
doors which were closed during the tests. Figure D.2 
shows the undamaged interior of the best expedient 
blast shelter tested prior to 1978, an improved version 
of the Small-Pole Shelter described in Appendix A. 
Its two heavy plywood blast doors excluded 
practically all blast effects; the pressure inside rose 
only to 1.5 psi—an overpressure not nearly high 
enough to break eardrums. The only damage was to 
the expedient shelter-ventilating pump (a KAP) in 
the stoop-in entryway. Two men worked about 5 
minutes to replace the 4 flap-valves that were blown 
loose. 

'%v®4^ 

^S^^g 

Fig. D.I. A small, earth-covered backyard 
shelter with a crude wooden frame—undamaged, 
although only 300 yards from ground zero at 
Hiroshima. 

Although the shelter itself was undamaged, its 
occupants would have been fatally injured because 
the shelter had no blast door. The combined effect of 
blast waves, excessive pressure, blast wind, and burns 
from extremely hot dust blown into the shelter (the 
popcorning effect) and from the heated air would 
have killed the occupants. For people to survive in 
areas of severe blast, their shelters must have strong 
blast doors. 

In nuclear weapons tests in the Nevada desert, 
box-like shelters built of lumber and covered with 
sandy earth were structurally undamaged by 10- to 
15-psi blast effects. However, none had blast doors, 
so occupants of these open shelters would have been 
injured by blast effects and burned as a result of the 
popcorning effect. Furthermore, blast winds blew 
away much of the dry, sandy earth mounded over the 
shelters for shielding; this resulted in inadequate 
protection against fallout radiation. 

Twelve different types of expedient shelters were 
blast-tested by Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
during three of Defense Nuclear Agency's blast tests.5 
Two of these tests each involved the detonation of a 
million pounds or more of conventional explosive: 
air-blast effects equivalent to those from a 1-kiloton 

Fig. D.2. Undamaged interior of a Small-Pole 
Shelter after blast testing at the 53-psi overpressure 
range. Large buildings would have been completely 
demolished. 

When blast-tested at 5-psi overpressure, not 
even the weakest covered-trench shelters with 
unsupported earth walls (described in Appendix A) 
were damaged structurally. However, if the covering 

earth were sandy and dry and if it were exposed to the 
blast winds of a megaton explosion at the 5-psi 
overpressure range, so much earth would be blown 
away that the shelter would give insufficient 
protection against fallout radiation. Much of the dry, 
shielding earth mounded over some of the above- 
ground shelters was, in fact, removed by the blast 
winds of these relatively small test explosions, even at 
the lower overpressure ranges at which homes would 
be wrecked. In contrast, in blast tests where the 
steeply mounded earth was damp, little blast-wind 
erosion resulted. (The reader should remember that 
even if shelters without blast doors are undamaged, 
the occupants'are likely to suffer injuries.) 

COIi'STRUCTION PRINCIPLES 

Millions of Americans—if given good instruc- 
tions, strong motivation, and several days to 
work—should be able to build blast shelters with 
materials found in many rural areas and suburban 
neighborhoods. During a crisis, yard trees could be 
cut down for poles and sticks, and a garage or part of 
a house could be torn down for lumber. Many 
average citizens could build expedient blast shelters if 
they learn to: 

® Utilize earth arching by making a yielding 
shelter. The remarkable protection that earth arching 
gives to those parts of a shelter designed to use it is 
illustrated by Fig. D.3. 

*> 
This picture shows the unbroken roof of a 4- 
foot-wide Pole-Covered Trench Shelter that was 

Fig. D.3. Effective earth arching in the earth 
covering of this 4-ft-wide Pole-Covered Trench 
Shelter prevented a single pole from being broken by 
blast forces that exerted a downward force of 53 psi 
(over 3'/2 tons per square foot) on the overlying 
earth. 

built in rock-like soil and blast tested where the blast 
pressure outside was 53 psi. Its strong blast doors 
prevented the blast wave from entering. Without the 
protection of earth arching that developed in the 5 
feet of earth cover over the yielding roof poles, the 
poles would have been broken like straws. In 
contrast, the ground shock and earth pressure 
produced by 1-kiloton blast effects almost com- 
pletely collapsed the unsupported, rock-like earth 
walls. 

Fig. D.4. Post-blast interior of an Above- 
ground, Door-Covered Shelter that survived 1-kilo- 
ton blast effects at the 5.8-psi overpressure range. The 
shelter walls were made of bedsheets containing 
earth, as described in Appendix A. 

Figure D.4 also indicates the effectiveness 
of earth arching. This photo shows the roof of a 
small, earth-covered fallout shelter, as it appeared 
after surviving blast effects severe enough to 
demolish most homes. The roof was made of light, 
hollow-core, interior doors and looks as though it 
had been completely broken. In fact, only the lower 
sheets of '/s-inch-thick veneer of the hollow-core 
interior doors were broken. (These breaks were 
caused by a faulty construction procedure—a front- 
end loader had dumped several tons of earth onto the 
uncovered doors.) The upper '/8-inch-thick sheets of 
veneer were bowed downward, unbroken, until an 
earth arch formed in the 2-foot-thick earth covering 
and prevented the thin sheets from being broken. 
Earth arching also prevented this roof from being 
smashed in by blast overpressure that exerted a 
pressure of 5.8 psi (835 pounds per square foot) on 
the surface of the earth mounded over this open 
shelter. (See Appendix A for details of construction.) 

• Make shelters with the minimum practical 
ceiling height and width. Most of the narrow 

212 

covered-trench shelters used by tens of thousands of 
Londoners during the World War II blitz were built 
^wjth only 4'/;-foot ceilings, to maximize blast 
protection and minimize high water-table problems. 
These shelters were found to be among the safest for 
protection against nearby explosions. The Chinese 
also have a good understanding of this design 
principle and skillfully utilize the protection provided 
by earth arching. A Chinese civil defense handbook 
states: "... the height and width of tunnel shelters 
should be kept to the minimum required to 
accommodate the sheltering requirements," and 
"The thicker the protective layer of earth, the greater 
the ability to resist blast waves.":i 

® Shore earth walls to prevent their caving in as a 
result of ground shock and earth pressure. Most 
unshored (that is, unsupported) earth walls are 
partially collapsed by ground shock at much lower 
blast overpressures than those at which a flexible roof 
protected by earth arching is damaged. Figure D.5 is 
a picture of a seated dummy taken by a high-speed 
movie camera mounted inside an unshored, Pole- 
Covered Trench Shelter of the Russian type tested at 
the 20-psi range. (A second dummy was obscured by 
blast-torn curtains made of blankets.) The shelter had 
an open stairway entryway, positioned at right angles 
to the stand-up-height trench and facing away from 
the targeted "city" so as to minimize the entry of blast 
waves and blast wind. 

Fig. D.5. A dummy in an unshored Pole- 
Covered Trench Shelter as it is struck by collapsing 
rock-like earth walls. The photo also shows the 
shelter's blanket-curtains as they are torn and blown 
into the shelter by the 180-mph blast wind. 
(Immediately after this photo was taken, the 
dummies were hit by the airborne blast wave and 
blast wind. Outside, the blast wind peaked at about 
490 mph.) 

Figure D.6 is a post-blast view of the essentially 
undamaged earth-covered roof poles and the 
disastrously collapsed, unshored shelter walls of the 
Russian shelter tested at 20 psi.21 Russian civil 
defense books state that unshored fallout shelters do 
not survive closer to the blast than the 7-psi 
overpressure range. This limitation was confirmed by 
an identical shelter tested at 7 psi; parts of its 
unshored walls were quite badly collapsed by the 
ground shock from an explosion producing merely 
1-kiloton blast effects. 

ÄS*s=>sasg 

Fig. D.6. Dummies after ground shock from 
1-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi range had 
collapsed the rock-like walls of a hardened desert soil 
called caliche. The dummies' steel "bones" and 
"joints" prevented them from being knocked down 
and buried. The fallen caliche all around them kept 
them from being blown over by the air blast wave and 
180-mph blast wind that followed. 

Unsupported earth walls should be sloped as 
much as practical. The length and strength of 
available roofing material should be considered and, 
in order to attain effective earth arching, the 
thickness of the earth cover should be at least half as 
great as the distance between the edges of the trench. 

The stability of the earth determines the proper 
method for shoring the walls of a trench shelter. 

Methods for shoring both loose, unstable earth and 
firm, stable earth are described below: 

*In loose, unstable earth such as sand, the 
walls of all underground shelters must be shored. 
First, an oversized trench must be dug with gently 
sloping sides. Next, the shoring is built, often as a 
freestanding, roofless structure. Then earth must be 

backfilled around the shoring to a level a few inches 
higher than the uppermost parts of the shoring, as in 
Fig. D,7. Finally, the roof poles or planks must be 
placed so that they are supported only by the 
backfilled earth. Blast tests have indicated that a 
Pole-Covered Trench Shelter thus proportioned and 
lightly shored should protect its occupants against 
disastrous collapse of its walls at overpressure ranges 
up to 15 psi. 

* In firm, stable earth, it is best first to dig a 
trench a few inches wider than 7 feet (the length of the 
roof poles) and 1 foot deep. Next, dig the part to be 
shored, down the center of this shallow trench, using 

the dimensions given for the shoring in Fig. D.7. The 
trench walls should be sloped and smoothed quite 
accurately, so that the shoring can be tightened 
against the earth. If the shoring does not press tightly 
against the trench walls, large wedges of earth may be 
jarred loose, hit the shoring, and cause it to collapse. 

A different, comparatively simple way to tighten 
shoring is indicated by Fig. D.8. This sketch shows a 
4-pole frame designed to be installed every 2 V2 feet 
along a trench in stable earth and to be tightened 
against trench-wall shoring with the same dimensions 
as those shown in Fig. D.7. Note that the two 
horizontal brace poles have shallow "V" notches 

ORNL-DWG 78-14430R 

BEDSH6ET (50 % POLYESTER), 
OR 

BURLAP BAGGING. 

CANVAS. 

OR 

OR 

CORRUGATED METAL ROOFING 

Fig. D.7. An illustration of several ways to shore a trench in unstable earth, using various materials. A 
4-piece frame (consisting of 4 poles, or 4 boards, installed as shown above) should be installed every 2% feet along 
the length of the trench, including the horizontal parts of the entryways. All parts of the shoring should be at least 
2 inches below the roof poles, so that the downward forces on the roof will press only on the earth. 

214 

ORNL DWG 78-17246R 

horizontal poles at the top of the triangle, one tied 
inside and the other tied outside the triangle, to hold 
the wall poles together. Before covering this shelter 
with earth, a 6-inch-thick covering of small limbs was 
placed horizontally across the approximately 3-inch- 
wide spaces between the 6'/2-foot wall poles; the limbs 
were then covered with bedsheets. 

BOTTOM OF 
SHALLOW V* 
SAWED AT SAME ' 
SLOPE AS WALL POLE 

Fig. D.8. A 4-pole frame designed so that it can 
be tightened against the shoring materials that must 
press firmly against the walls of a trench dug in stable 
earth. (In this sketch, the middle sections of three 
poles have been removed, so that the upper brace pole 
may be seen more clearly.) 

sawed in both ends. If these brace poles are driven 
downward when positioned as shown, the two wall 
poles are forced outward against the shoring 
materials placed between them and the earth walls. 
An upper brace pole should be cut to the length 
needed to make it approximately the same height as 
the roof poles on each side of it (no higher) after the 
shoring is tightened. Finally, each "V"-notched end 
should be nailed to its wall pole. 

Light, yielding poles can serve simultaneously 
both to roof and to shore a shelter. A good example is 
the Chinese "Man" Shelter illustrated in Fig. D.9, 
requiring comparatively few poles to build. This 
shelter is too cramped for long occupancy, and its 
unshored, lower earth walls can be squeezed in by 
blast pressure. Therefore, it is not recommended if 
sufficient materials are available for building a well- 
shored, covered-trench shelter. It is described here 
primarily to help the reader understand the construc- 
tion of similarly designed entryways, outlined later in 
this appendix. The room and the horizontal entryway 
of the model tested were made of 6'/2-foot poles 
averaging only 3 inches in diameter. It had two 
vertical, triangular entries of ORNL design. Each 
was protected by an expedient triangular blast door 
made of poles. In Fig. D.9, note the two small 

5 5 10 
1*3 140—H 
H —190- «-t 

m 3-io7 A^mi^mmm 

Fig. D.9. Chinese "Man" Shelter tested at 
20 psi, and undamaged because the thin poles yielded 
and were protected by earth arching. This drawing, 
was taken from a Chinese civil defense manual. The 
dimensions are in centimeters. 

When blast-tested in loose, unstable soil, the 
unsupported earth walls of the trench below the wall 
poles were squeezed in. The 12-inch width of the foot 
trench was reduced to as little as 4 inches by the short- 
duration forces produced by 0.2-kiloton blast effects 
at 50 psi. The much longer duration forces of a 
megaton explosion would be far more damaging to 
the shelter at lower overpressure ranges, due to 
destabilizing and squeezing-in unshored earth at 
depths many feet below ground level. 

Calculations based on blast-test findings indi- 
cate that the unsupported earth walls of a shelter are 
likely to fail if theaboveground maximum overpress- 
ure is greater than 5 to 7 psi and this overpressure is 
caused by an explosion that is a megaton or more. 

215 

(Most homes would be severely damaged by the 3-psi 
blast effects from a 1 -megaton or larger weapon. This 
damage would result one mile closer to ground zero 
of a 1-megaton surface burst than the distance at 
which the unshored earth walls of some shelters 
would be collapsed. For a 20-megaton surface burst, 
the corresponding reduction in distance would be 
about 2.7 miles.) 

© Build sufficiently long and strong entry ways. 
Blast shelters need longer horizontal entryways, 
taller vertical entryways, and thicker earth cover than 
do most fallout shelters; these are needed primarily 
for increased protection against high levels of initial 
nuclear radiation. The entryways of the Small-Pole 
Siv'vr described in Appendix A.3 (with the 
improvements for increased blast protection outlined 
in the following section of this appendix) afford 
protection against both blast and radiation up to the 
50-psi overpressure range. However, these entryways 
require straight poles 14 feet long; these may be 
difficult to find or transport. 

In contrast, both the horizontal and the vertical 
parts of the triangular entry pictured in Figs. D.10, 
D. 11, and D.12 require only small-diameter, short 
poles. Triangular entries of this type were un- 
damaged by 1-kiloton blast effects at the 20-psi 
overpressure range5 and by 0.2-kiloton blast effects at 

50 psi. This type of entry and its blast door (also 
triangular and made of short poles) can be used with 
a wide variety of expedient blast shelters and should 
withstand megaton blast effects at 25 psi. Therefore, 
their construction is described in considerable detail. 

* The horizontal part of a triangular entry: If 
the Chinese "Man" Shelter shown in Fig. D.9 is made 
without excavating the unshored lower trench that 
forms its earth seats, it will serve as a horizontal, 
shored crawlway-entry affording blast protection up 
to at least the 25-psi overpressure range. Two 
horizontal entries, one at each end of the shelter, 
should be provided. Each entry should be 10 feet 
long. This length is needed to reduce the amount of 
initial nuclear radiation reaching the blast shelter 
room while assuring adequate through-ventilation. 
The outer part of such a horizontal entry is pictured 
in the background of Fig. D.10. 

* The vertical part of a triangular entry: The 
lower section of the vertical part is made in a similar 
manner to the horizontal shelter shown in Fig. D.9. 
Figure D.10 shows 4'/2-foot horizontal poles (1) 
forming a "V", with one end of each pole laid on top 
of the adjacent lower pole. The other ends of these 
poles (1) are pressed against the two pairs of vertical 
posts (2). (After this photo was taken, the tops of 
these two pairs of vertical posts were sawed off as 

PHOTO 2954-77R 

Fig. D.10. Uncompleted lower section of a vertical triangular entry. 

216 

SPACER 
BLOCKS 
OF 8-12 in. 
LONG 
POLES 

L 

CONSTRUCTION OF THE 
PART OF THE VERTICAL 
ENTRY OPPOSITE THE 
CRAWLWAY OPENING 

ORNL-DWG 78-14675 

5-ft-LONG 
HORIZONTAL 
ENTRYWAY 
OF CHINESE 
SHELTER 

OUTSIDE 2 POLES 
LARGER DIA AND 
LOG-CABIN NOTCHED 

SPACER POLE 
(WIRED TO 
ADJACENT POLE) 

3% in. DIA 

J 

4" AND 5" DIA 

STEP (1 ft-4 in.; 
2% in. DIA) 
SPACED ~ 1 ft 
APART 

TOP VIEW 

DIG SLOTS IN SIDE 
OF TRENCH FOR 
ENDS OF HORIZON- 
TAL POLES 

5 ft 6 in 
ENTRYWAY TRENCH BOTTOM 

VIEW LOOKING INTO SHELTER FROM A-A 

Fig. D.H. Lower part of a vertical triangular entry, showing its connection to the horizontal part of 

the shelter entry. 

217 

Fig. D.12. Completed frame of Chinese "Man" Shelter showing its two ORNL-designed entryways 
(one at each end) and triangular blast doors made of poles. Before covering the triangular vertical entries with 
earth, tree branches were placed vertically over the sides; the branches then were covered with bedsheets. 
Horizontal branches, also covered with bedsheets, were laid over the rest of the shelter frame. After being 
covered with earth, this shelter was subjected to 1-kiloton blast effects. Multiple earth arching over and around 
this yielding structure prevented both the small poles and the bedsheets from being damaged at 20 psi. 

shown in Fig. D.H.) The 4'/2-foot horizontal poles (1) 
were kept level by the short spacer-poles (3) that were 
wired or nailed in place. 

the entry is decreased unless the larger-diameter 
horizontal poles that form the "V" are made longer 
than 4'/2 feet. 

Each pair of vertical posts (2) was securely wired 
together at top and bottom. The two pairs were held 
apart at top and bottom by two horizontal brace- 
poles toenailed in place to frame the rectangular 
30-X30-inch crawlway "doorway" between the 
vertical entry and the horizontal entry. Only the 
upper pole (4) of these two 30-inch-long horizontal 
brace-poles is shown. 

The two pairs of vertical posts (2) were 
positioned so that they pressed against two 7'/2-foot 
horizontal poles (5); only the uppermost is shown. 
These in turn pressed against the outermost two poles 
(6) of the horizontal entry and against the earth in 
two slot-trenches dug in the sidewalls of the 
excavation. These two 7'/2-foot poles (5) should beat 
least 6 inches in diameter. 

Additional details of the lower section of this 
vertical triangular entry are given in Fig. D.H. If 
horizontal poles considerably larger in diameter than 
those illustrated are used, fewer poles are required 
and strength is increased. However, the space inside 

As shown on the left in Fig. D.10, a small, 
vertical pole (7) was placed in the small "V" between 
the outer ends of the horizontal poles that form the. 
lower section of the vertical entry. After this photo 
was taken, a second small, vertical pole was 
positioned in the adjacent large "V", inside the entry. 
These two poles (7) were then tightly wired together 
so as to make a strong, somewhat yielding, outer- 
corner connection of the horizontal poles (1)—in the 
same way that the tops of the side-wall poles of the 
Chinese "Man" Shelter are bound together. 

The upper section of the vertical part of this 
entry (the section above the tops of the two pairs of 
vertical posts shown in Fig. D.10 and Fig. D.ll) is 
made by overlapping the ends of its nearly horizontal 
poles (Fig. D.12). These poles [marked with a (1) in 
Fig. D.10] were each 4 feet 6 inches long and varied 
uniformly in diameter from about 2% inches just 
above the two pairs of wired-together posts, to 4-inch 
diameters just below the triangular door frame of 
poles. The triangular-shaped blast door was hinged 

to and closed against this door frame. The hinges 
were strips cut from worn auto tires, to be described 
shortly. 

The upper section is formed by laying poles in a 
triangular pattern, ends crossing at the angles, with 
large ends and small ends placed so that the poles are 
as nearly horizontal as is practical. Each of its three 
corners is held together by strong wires that tightly 
bind an outside and an inside small vertical pole, in 
the same manner as the top of the Chinese "Man" 
Shelter (shown in Fig. D.9) is secured. (Instead of 
No. 9 soft steel wire, rope or twisted strips of strong 
fabric could be used.) 

Before starting to install the upper section of a 
vertical triangular entry, the three outermost of the 
six small vertical poles that will hold the three corners 
together should be connected temporarily with three 
small horizontal poles. Connect them at the height of 
the door frame planned for the triangular blast door, 
1 and space them so as to be the same size as this door 

frame. 

Next, all the horizontal poles should be laid out 
on the ground in the order of their increasing 
diameters. The triangular entry then should be 
started with the smallest poles at the base, with 
increasingly large-diameter poles used toward the 
top—so that the three pairs of small vertical poles will 
press securely against all the horizontal side poles of 
the entry. 

To prevent the negative overpressure ("suction") 
phase of the blast from yanking out and carrying 
away the blast door and the upper part of the vertical 
entry to which it is hinged, the uppermost 4 or 5 
horizontal poles of each of the three sides of the 
vertical entry should be wired or tied securely 
together. Rope or strips of strong cloth can be used if 
strong wire is not available. 

Before placing earth around this lightly con- 
structed blast-protective entry, the vertical walls 
must be covered to a thickness of about 6 inches with 
a yielding, crushable covering of limbs, brush, or 
innerspring mattresses. Limbs or brush should be 
placed in three layers, with the innermost layer at 
right angles to the underlying poles. The yielding 
thickness then is covered with strong cloth, such as 
50% dacron bedsheets, or two thicknesses of 4-mil 
polyethylene film. This outermost covering keeps 
loose earth or sand from filling spaces inside the 
yielding layer or running into the entry. Thus 
protected, this vertical entry should be undamaged 
by 25-psi blast effects of megaton weapons. 

A vertical blast-protective entry can also be 
made like a strong box, using 2-inch-thick boards. 
Such entries afford blast protection up to 50 psi if 
made as small as shown here and protected with 
yielding materials such as a 6-inch-thick layer of 
brush covered with strong cloth. 

T 
•22in, 

CD 

® Install blast doors to keep out airborne blast 
waves, blast wind, overpressure, blast-borne debris, 
burning-hot dust and air, and fallout. 

A fast-rising overpressure of as little as 5 psi will 
break some people's eardrums. At overpressures of 
15 to 20 psi, 50% of the people who are exposed will 
have their eardrums broken. However, persons near 
a shelter wall may have their eardrums broken by 
somewhat less than half of these unreflected 
overpressures. (Any wall may reflect blast waves and 
greatly increase overpressures near it.) Broken 
eardrums are not serious in normal times, but after a 
nuclear attack this injury is likely to be far more 
dangerous to persons in crowded shelters without 
effective medical treatment. Lung damage, that can 
result from overpressures as low as 10 to 12 psi, 
would also be more serious under post-attack 
conditions. 

A blast door must withstand blast waves and 
overpressure. Not only must the door itself be 
sufficiently strong to withstand forces at least as great 
as those which the shelter will survive, but in addition 
the door frame and the entranceway walls must be 
equally as strong. The expedient blast door pictured 
in Fig. D. 13 was made of rough boards, each a full 2 
inches thick. It had a continuous row of hinges made 
of 18-inch-long strips cut from the treads of worn car 
tires. 

The strips were nailed to the vertical poles on 
one side of the vertical entry. These and other details 
of construction are shown in Fig. D.14. Although the 
two center boards were badly cracked by the shock 
wave and overpressure at the 3 7-psi range, the door 

219 

Figure D.15 shows a blast door made of 5 
thicknesses of %-inch exterior plywood, well glued 
and nailed together with 4'/2-in. nails at 4-in. 
spacings. This door was protected by 4 blast- 
protector logs, each 8 feet long and about 8 inches in 
diameter. The logs were notched, nailed together, 
and surrounded with earth. For protection against 
ignition by the thermal pulse from an explosion, 
exposed wood and rubber should be coated with 
thick whitewash (slaked lime) or mud, or covered 
with aluminum foil. 

An equally strong blast door and the door base 
upon which it closes can be made of poles. If poles are 
fresh-cut, they are easy to work with ax and saw. 
Figure D.16 shows the best blast-tested design. This 
door also had a continuous row of hinges made from 
worn auto tire treads. The pole to which the hinges 
were attached was 7 inches in diameter after peeling 
and had been flattened on its top and outer sides. The 
two other poles of the equal-sided triangle were 8 
inches in diameter and had been flattened with an ax 
on the bottom, top, and inner sides. The three poles 
were each 55 inches long. They were notched and 
spiked together with 60-penny nails so that the door 
would close snugly on its similarly constructed base 
made of three stout poles. Other poles, at least 7 
inches in diameter before being hewn so that they 
would fit together snugly, were nailed side-by-side on 
top of the three outer poles. 

Many Americans have axes and would be able to 
cut poles, but not many know how to use an ax to hew 
flat, square sides on a pole or log. This easily acquired 
skill is illustrated by Fig. D.17. The worker should 
first fasten the pole down by nailing two small poles 
to it and to other logs on the ground. Figure D.17 
shows a pole thus secured. When hewing a fiat side, 
the worker stands with his legs spread far apart, and 
repeatedly moves his feet so that he can look almost 
straight down at where his ax head strikes. First, 
vertical cuts with a sharp ax are made about 3 or 4 
inches apart and at angles of about 45° to the surface 
of the pole, for the length of the pole. These multiple 
cuts should be made almost as deep as is needed to 
produce a fiat side of the desired width. Then the 
worker, again beginning at the starting end, should 
cut off long strips, producing a fiat side. 

Fig. D.13. Blast door surrounded by 4 blast- 
protector logs that were notched and nailed together. 
The wet, mounded soil had been compacted by the 
blast but not blown away. 

pictured in Fig. D.13 afforded good protection 
against all blast effects from a surface explosion of a 
million pounds of TNT. In Fig. D. 14, note the 
essential, strong tie-down attachment of the wires at 
the bottom of the vertical entry, to prevent the blast 
door from being yanked open by the negative 
pressure ("suction") that follows the overpressure. 

Blast doors must be protected against reflected 
pressures from blast waves that could strike an edge 
of an unprotected door and tear it off its hinges. Note 
the blast-protector logs installed around the door 
pictured in Fig. D. 14. When the door was closed, the 
tops of these four logs were about 2 inches higher 
than the door, thus protecting its edges on all sides. 

The closed door must be prevented from 
rebounding like a spring and opening a fraction of a 
second after being bowed down by overpressure, or 
from being opened and perhaps torn off its hinges by 
the partial vacuum ("suction") that follows the 
overpressure phase. Figure D.I4 gives the details of 
such a hold-down system for a blast door. Note that 
near the bottom of the vertical entry the 6 strong 
wires must encircle a horizontal pole that is flattened 
on one side and nailed to the vertical wall poles with 
at least a dozen 6-inch (60-penny) nails. Blast tests up 
to the 53-psi overpressure range have proved that this 
hold-down system works.5 

220 

BRIDLE SPACE 

, 8-2X6-in X«MO-in.-LONG BOARDS FOR 10psi 

OVERPRESSURE (ROUGH LUMBER PREFERRED). 

8-in. DIAM LOGS OF BLAST- 
PROTECTION FRAME ARE 
PLACED 5 TO 6-in. OUTSIDE 
ENTRYWAY. 

8 STRANDS OF NO. 9 WIRE 
(FOR ANY BLAST OVER 
PRESSURE 

WIRE LOOP AT END OF 
B STRANDS OF NO 9 
WIRE CONTINUING 
INTO WIRE V BRIDLE 

LOAD-BINDER INSTALLED 
FOR 4-sec HOLD-DOWN 
OF BLAST DOOR 

6 STRANDS OF NO. 9 
SOFT STEEL WIRE 

5-in DIAM POLE,FLAT- 
TEN ONE SIDE BY i 
REMOVING iVfcin AND 
NAIL WITH TWO 60- 
PENNY NAILS TO 
EACH VERTICAL POLE 

ORNL D»G 75-1063 

ALL NAILS BENT OVER AND 
CLINCHED 

SHORT SECURITY-CORD TIED 
TO PROP-STICK. 

•TWO STRANDS NO 9 WIRE . 

FOUR STRANDS NO 9 WIRE. 

^T~*-- BLAST-PROTECTION 

, ,./■ FRAME (NOTCHED 

OiT-r.. ... LOGS-LIKE LOG 

SIMPLER FRAME CORNER, 
REOUIRING THREE 60-PENNY 
NAILS. 

WIRE SAFETY LOOP 
HOOKED OVER 3 TO 4-in. 
DIAM SAFETY POST 

FIRST EACH CAR-TIRE HINGE 
IS NAILED TO DOOR WITH SIX 
16-PENNY NAILS (CLINCHED). 
THEN A 2X6-in BOARD IS 
NAILED OVER HINGES WITH 
40-PENNY NAILS (CLINCHED) 

CAR-TIRE HINGE, 
4-in. X 18-in. LONG 

OUTSIDE 12 in OF EACH VERTICAL 
POLE IS FLATTENED FOR HINGE, 
ATTACHMENT WITH NINE 
20-PENNY NAILS PER POLE. 

CROSS SECTION 

SHOWING HINGE OFF-SET AND BLAST 
DOOR-SHOWN IN SAFETY POSITION. 

BOTTOM OF ENTRYWAY 

Fig. D.14. Expedient blast door that can be closed and secured in 4 seconds. 

221 

To hew a second flat side at right angles to the 
first side, rotate the pole 90°, secure it again, and 
repeat—as pictured in Fig. D.17. 

•■ Provide blast closures for an adequate ventila- 
tion system. The following two expedient closure 
systems permit adequate volumes of ventilating air to 
be pumped through a shelter: 

1. Install two blast doors, one on each end of the 
shelter, designed to be left open until the extremely 
bright light from a large blast is seen. Figure D.14 
shows a door held open by a prop-stick that can be 
yanked away by the attached pull-cord. While 
propped open, one blast door serves as an extremely 
low-resistance air-intake opening, and the other 
serves as an air-exfiaust opening. A large KAP can 
pump air at the rate of several thousand cubic feet per 
minute through such open doors. 

When an attack is expected, each pull-cord 
should be held by a shelter occupant who stays ready 
at all times to yank out the prop-stick as soon as he 
sees the light of an explosion. After the door has 
fallen closed, the loop at the end of its wire bridle is 
close to the upper hook of the load-binder and at the 
same height (Fig. D.14). The person who closes the 
door should quickly hook the upper hook of the load- 
binder into the wire loop and pull down on the handle 
of the load-binder. The door will then be tightly shut. 
(Sources during an emergency would be the millions 
of load-binders owned by truckers and farmers.) 

At distances from a large explosion where blast 
wave and overpressure effects are not destructive 
enough to smash most good expedient blast shelters, 
there is enough time between the instant the light of 
the explosion is seen and the arrival of its blast wave 
for an alert person to shut and securely fasten a well- 
designed blast door. The smaller the explosion and 
the greater the overpressure range, the shorter the 
warning time. Thus at the 15-psi overpressure range 
from a 1-megaton surface burst (1.5 miles), the blast 
wave arrives about 2.8 seconds after the light; 
whereas at the 10-psi overpressure range from a 1- 
megaton surface burst (1.9 miles), the blast wave 
arrives about 4.5 seconds after the light. For a 20- 
megaton surface burst, the warning time at the 15-psi 
range is about 8 seconds, and at the 30-psi over- 
pressure range, about 4 seconds. Experiments have 
shown that even people who react quite slowly can 
close and secure this door within 4 seconds after 
seeing a spotlight shine on the door without warning. 

Fig. D.15. Tire-strip hinges nailed to an ex- 
pedje^t., 4-inch-thick blast door made of plywood, 
desig' -?d to withstand 50-psi blast effects of very large 
weapons and undamaged by blast at the 53-psi 
range. 

-sr^iSssazs 

Fig. D.16. Blast-tested triangular blast door 
made of hand-hewn pine poles, notched and nailed 
together. This door closed on a triangular pole base 
that is concealed in this photo by two of the three 
blast-protector logs that also withstood 53-psi blast 
effects. 

Fig. D.17. Hewing flat sides on a pole with a 

sharp ax. 

■7OT"iOT^^^ 

222 

2. Install in the vertical entries two expedient 
blast valves, one on each end of the shelter, to protect 
both the vertical air-intake and air-exhaust ducts, 
which should be installed outside the vertical entries.' 
Figure D.18 illustrates the construction of a fast- 
closing expedient blast valve, a design that was 
undamaged by the 65-psi shock wave and other 
effects produced by the explosion of a million pounds 
of TNT. When blast-tested in a shock-tube at 100-psi, 
the flaps were undamaged; thev closed in 6/1000 of a 
second (0.006 sec). This is as fast as the best factory- 
made blast valves close. 

ORtJL DWG 75-222SA 

DIRECTION OF 
ENTERING 
BLAST : 

ORNL-DWG 78-14428R 

TOP OF BLAST 
VALVE SHOULD 
BE AT LEAST 
3 t! BELOW THE 
BLAST DOOR 
ON ENTRY 

2 in.-THICK 
BOARD. A PART 
OF THE VERTICAL 
AIR OUCT, IS X 10 Ii 
IN FRONT OF THE 
VALVE 

KtACE-BOARDS 
PRESSING AGAINST 
THE FACE OF THE 
VALVE HOUSING 
TO KEEP NEGATIVE 
PRESSURE 
FROM "SUCKING" 
OUT THE WHOLE 
VALVE 

VERTICAL AIR DUCT 
SHOULD EXTEND 2 
OR 3 ft BELOW 
BOTTOM OF BLAST 
VALVE AND PREFERABLY 
BELOW THE BOTTOM OF 

 THE VERTICAL ENTRY 

Fig. D.19. Installation of a 50-psi Overlapping- 
Flaps Blast Valve in such a way that it will not be 
blown into a shelter by the blast overpressure, nor 
pulled out by the following negative pressure 
("suction") phase. 

per minute (125 cfm) through a shelter equipped with 
such valves. This ventilation rate is ample for at least 
40 people in cold weather. Except in hot and 
humid weather, a constant air supply of about 10 
cfm per shelter occupant is enough to maintain 
tolerable conditions during continuous shelter 
occupancy for many days. 

If a factory-made blower capable of pumping 
several hundred cfm is available, use it. Such a hand- 
operated blower can pump against much higher air 
flow resistances than a KAP can. It can pump its full- 
rated volume of outdoor air through a shelter 
equipped w.th two Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valves- 
each with only 2 air openings-providing 24 
square inches of openings per valve. 

Remember that a pressure of 7200 pounds 
pushes against each square foot of the exposed face of 

Fig. D.18. Overlapping-Flaps Blast Valve, 
made of boards, plywood, and strips cut from the 
treads of wom car tires. 

To withstand 50 psi, the load-bearing "2-inch" 
boards (actually 1 '/2 inches thick) of the valve should 
be at least 6 inches wide, if the 1 -in.-high air openings 
are each made 12 in. wide, measured between two 
vertical poles of a shelter entry. See Fig. D.i9, that 
gives the dimensions of a valve that has been'blast 
tested. Note that there are 5 inches of solid wood at 
each end of each Nin.-high air opening. If there are 5 
such air openings to a valve, a properly installed KAP 
(Appendix B) can pump air at about 125 cubic feet 

a blast valve when it is subjected to a 50-psi blast 
overpressure. Also keep in mind that the "suction" 
that follows can exert an outwardly directed force of 
up to 700 pounds per square foot on the valve face 
and can yank it out of position unless it is securely 
installed. Figure D.19 shows how to securely install a 
blast valve. (Merely nailing a blast valve in its 
opening will not enable it to withstand severe blast 
forces.) 

• Minimize aboveground construction and the 
mounding of shielding earth. At high overpressure 
ranges, the shock wave and the blast-wind drag can 
wreck an aboveground shelter entry. For example, 
the 5-ft-high earth mound over a shelter built with its 
pole roof at ground level was moved enough by 1- 
kilotcn air-blast effects at the 53-psi overpressure 
range to break one of the poles of a blast-doorframe. 
The forces of a 1-megaton explosion at the same 
overpressure range would have operated 10 times as 
long, and probably would have smashed the vertical 
entryways of this shelter. Whenever practical, a blast 
shelter should be built far enough belowground so 
that the top of its shielding earth cover is at ground 
level. Avoiding aboveground construction and earth 
mounds also greatly reduces the chances of damage 
from blast-hurled, heavy debris, such as tree trunks 
and pieces of buildings. 

Dry earth, steeply mounded over a shelter which 
is subjected to blast winds from a big explosion, will 
be mostly blown away. However, blast-wind "scour- 
ing" of wet earth is negligible. The blast winds from a 
1-kiloton explosion at the 31-psi overpressure range 
scoured away 17 inches of dry, sandy soil mounded at 
a slope of 32°. 

If it is impractical to build a blast shelter with its 
roof belowground, good protection can be attained 
by mounding even dry earth at slopes not steeper 
than 10°. 

® Provide adequate shielding against initial 
nuclear radiation. Good expedient blast shelters 
require a greater thickness of earth cover than is 
needed on good fallout shelters, for these reasons: 

* Blast shelters should also protect against 
initial nuclear radiation emitted by the 
fireball. This radiation is reduced by half 
when it penetrates about 5 inches of packed 
earth (as compared to a halving-thickness of 
only about 3% inches of earth against 
radiation from fallout). 

">">"} 

* The initial radiation, in some areas where 
good blast shelters will survive, can be much 
greater than the fallout radiation is likely to 
be. 

* Initial nuclear radiation that comes through 
entryways is more difficult to attenuate 
(reduce) than fallout radiation. Therefore, 
longer entryways or additional right-angle 

. turns must be provided. 

For these reasons, good blast shelters should be 
covered with at least 4 ft of well-packed, average- 
weight earth, or 5 ft of unpacked or light earth. (A 3-ft 
thickness gives excellent protection-against radiation 
from fallout.) 

A 50-PSI SMALL-POLE SHELTER 

This expedient blast shelter is described in detail 
to enable the reader to build this model. The details 
will help him better understand the design principles 
of other expedient blast shelters that are capable of 
preventing injuries from blast effects severe enough 
to destroy all ordinary buildings and kill the 
occupants. Blast tests and calculations have indicated 
that the Small-Pole Shelter described and illustrated 
in Appendix A.3 will afford protection against all 
weapon effects at overpressure ranges up to 50 psi 
that are produced by an explosion of 1 megaton, or 
larger, provided the shelter is: 

• Made with horizontal entryways each with 
ceilings no higher than 7 ft, 2 in., no wider than 3 ft, 
and each at least 10 ft long—to lessen the radiation 
coming through the entries (see Fig. D.20). Lower 
and narrower entryways would give better protection 
but would increase the time required for entry. 

'•' Constructed with a floor of poles that are 4 in. or 
more in diameter, laid side-by-side, with the wall 
poles resting on the floor poles. The ground shock 
and earth pressures at a depth of 10 ft or more 
resulting from an overpressure on the surface of more 
than about 35 psi, if caused by a large explosion, may 
destabilize and squeeze earth upward into the shelter 
through an unprotected earth floor. The Small-Pole 
Shelter described in Appendix A.3 has an earth floor. 

• Installed in an excavation about 13 feet deep, 
with the shelter's vertical entrances appropriately 
increased in height so that the blast doors are only 
about one foot above the original ground level. 

224 

BLAST DOOR 
4 3/4 in. THICK 
PLYWOOD 

BLAST PROTECTOR 

ORNL-DWG 78-18835 

Fig. D.20. Entryway of Small-Pole Blast Shelter shielded against initial nuclear radiation. This 

sketch is a simplified vertical section through the centerline of one end of the shelter. 

• Made with 4 rectangular horizontal braces in 
each vertical entry, in addition to the ends of the two 
long, ladder-like braces. The detailed drawings in 
Appendix A show such braces. The lowest rectangu- 
lar brace should be positioned 3'/2 feet above the 
flooring at the bottom of the vertical entry (see Fig. 
D.20). 

• Equipped with blast doors each made of 5 sheets 
of '/j-inch exterior plywood (see Fig. D.15) bonded 
with resin glue and nailed together with 4!/2 in. nails. 
The nails should be driven on 4-in. spacings and their 
protruding ends should be clinched (bent over). The 
blast doors must be secured against being yanked 
open by negative pressure ("suction") by.securing 

them with a strong wire bridle (see Fig. D.14), and 
with the lower, fixed wire strongly connected near the 
bottom of the entry to all of the vertical poles on one 
side, as shown in Fig. D.14. 

© Provided with an adequate ventilation pump 
and with ventilation openings protected against blast 
by expedient blast-valves (Fig. D.18) installed in the 
vertical entries as shown in Fig. D.19, to protect the 
air-intake and the air-exhaust openings. (Ventilation 
openings should be as far as practical from buildings 
and combustible materials. Manually closed ventila- 
tion openings are NOT effective at the 50-psi 
overpressure range of most weapons, because there is 
insufficient time to close them between the arrival of 

the warning light from the explosion and the arrival 
of the blast wave.) 

® Made with the roof poles covered by a yielding 
layer of brush or limbs about 6 inches thick, or of 
innerspring mattresses. This yielding layer in turn 
should be covered with bedsheets or other strong 
cloth, to increase the effectiveness of protective earth 
arching. Brush or limbs should be laid in 3 layers with 
sticks of the middle layer perpendicular to those of' 
the other two layers. 

®. Covered with 5 feet of earth, sloped no steeper 
than 10°. 

© Provided with additional shielding materials in 
the entryways, as shown in Fig. D.20. Such shielding 
wouid be needed to prevent occupants from receiving 
possibly incapacitating or fatal doses of initial 
nuclear radiation through the entryways at the 50-psi 
overpressure range, if the shelter is subjected to the 
effects of a weapon that is one megaton, or larger, in 
explosive yield. 

Damp earth serves better for neutron shielding 
material than dry earth and can be substituted for 
water as shielding material if sufficient water 
containers are not available. (At the 50-psi over- 
pressure range from explosions smaller than one 
megaton, the entry and shielding shown in Fig. D.20 
may not provide adequate protection against initial 
nuclear radiation.) 

When the shelter is readied for rapid occupancy, 
the shelter-ventilating KAP is secured against the 
ceiling, and the bags of earth in the doorway (under 
the KAP) are removed. Persons entering the shelter 
would stoop to go under the platform adjacent to the 
vertical entry. This platform is attached to vertical 
wall-poles of the horizontal entry and supports 
shielding water and earth. When all except the person 
who will shut and secure the blast door are inside the 
shelter room, occupants should quickly begin to 
place bags of earth in the doorway. When the attack 
has begun, the whole doorway can be closed with 
bags of earth or other dense objects until ventilation 
is necessary. 

The entries of other types of blast shelters can be 

shielded in similar ways. 

* Protected against fire by being built sufficiently 
distant from buildings and flammable vegetation and 
by having its exposed wood covered. For maximum 
expedient protection against ignition by the thermal 

225 

radiation from a large explosion, all exposed wood 
should be free of bark, coated with wet mud or damp 
slaked lime (whitewash), and covered with aluminum 
sheet metal or foil to reflect heat. (Most of the 
thermal radiation from an explosion that was 
1 megaton or larger would reach the 50-psi over- 
pressure range after the blast wave had arrived and 
had torn the expedient protective coverings from the 
wood. However, as has been observed in megaton 
nuclear weapon tests, the dust cloud first produced by 
the popcorning effect and later by the blast winds 
would screen solid wood near the ground so 
effectively against thermal radiation that it would not 
be ignited, provided it had been initially protected as 
described above.) 

PRECAUTIONS FOR OCCUPANTS 
OF BLAST SHELTERS 

Although a well constructed blast shelter may be 
undamaged at quite high overpressure ranges, its 
occupants maybe injured or killed as a result of rapid 
ground motions that move the whole shelter several 
inches in a few thousandths of a second. Rapid 
ground motions are not likely to cause serious 
injuries unless the shelter is in an area subjected to 30- 
psi or greater blast effects. To prevent possible injury, 
when the occupants of high-protection blast shelters 
are expecting attack they should avoid: 

® Having their heads close to the ceiling. The "air 
slap" of the air-blast wave may push down the earth 
and an undamaged shelter much more rapidly than a 
person can fall. If one's head were to be only a few 
inches from the ceiling, a fractured skull could result. 

• Leaning against a wall, because it may move 
very rapidly, horizontally as well as vertically. 

© Sitting or standing on the floor, because ground 
shock may cause the whole shelter (including the 
floor) to rise very fast and injure persons sitting or 
standing on the floor. The safest thing to do is to sit or 
lie in a securely suspended, strong hammock or chair, 
or on thick foam rubber such as that of a mattress, or 
on a pile of small branches. 

In dry areas or in a dry expedient shelter, ground 
shock may produce choking dust. Therefore, shelter 
occupants should be prepared to cover their faces 
with towels or other cloth, or put on a mask. If an 
attack is expected, they should keep such protective 
items within easy reach. 

