Foreword

Most of the world’s natural disasters occur in Asia and the Paciﬁc. They 
cause enormous destruction and human suffering in the Asian Development 
Bank’s (ADB) developing member countries (DMCs).

Environmental degradation, which is often a result of economic 
development and associated human settlement patterns that ignore appropriate 
resource management, can increase a country’s vulnerability to natural hazards 
and exacerbate the impacts.

As a development institution, ADB is quite concerned about the rising 
incidence and impact of natural disasters in Asia and the Paciﬁc region. Losses 
from natural disasters reduce the pace of sustained economic development 
and often lead to a heavy drain on available resources, diverting them from 
pursuing developmental aims. Preparing for disaster situations and, if possible, 
preventing them is considered by many as an integral part of development 
planning focusing on achieving sustainable growth, poverty reduction, and 
environmental balance. ADB shares this view.

In addition to utilizing its normal project lending operations for 
incorporating disaster-mitigation measures into developmental activities 
and ﬁnancing disaster-rehabilitation projects, ADB may rely on its technical 
assistance facility for promoting disaster mitigation. Such assistance is 
available to its DMCs for the formulation of disaster-mitigation plans, devising 
mitigation strategies, and designing measures to carry them out. This type of 
ADB assistance is available on either a regional, country, or project level.

An example of technical assistance on the regional level is the present 
effort by ADB to assist its DMCs to gain a better understanding of disaster 
risks and vulnerability to natural hazards, and to focus their attention on disaster 
management issues. This Handbook, as well as the ﬁrst volume Disaster 
Mitigation in Asia and the Paciﬁc published in July 1991, are products of the 
ADB-ﬁnanced Regional Seminar on Disaster Mitigation, October 1990.

XIV 

Disaster Management

The principal concept underlying this handbook is that modern disaster 
management is very much an ongoing national requirement, important to 
governments and people alike. It has special signiﬁcance today because of 
increasing dangers to the world environment posed by natural hazards and 
their effects on economic development. To be effective, disaster management 
should be implemented as a comprehensive and continuous activity, not as a 
periodic reaction to individual disaster circumstances. Consequently, national 
ofﬁcials who are charged with disaster management responsibilities have 
to deal with a wide range of policy, planning, organizational, operational, 
and other matters. It is clearly beneﬁcial for them to have access to relevant 
guidelines and advice, especially in the form of a ready-reference handbook.

The handbook draws upon disaster management practices in the region 
and endeavors to relate realistically to the needs of national disaster managers. 
It covers the broad disaster management ﬁeld and offers guidelines on the 
major segments that constitute that ﬁeld. The handbook does not attempt to 
deal with highly specialized aspects of disasters such as detailed economic, 
technical, and sociological issues. These are more the concern of specialists 
who are normally available to provide the relevant advice. The reader should 
ﬁnd the handbook simple and straightforward to use. Individual chapters are 
as self-contained as possible, with adequate cross-references where necessary. 
Its content is not dogmatic, instead it takes an advisory line, including options 
and case material references to help disaster managers in resolving their local 
needs. This contributes to the application of past experiences accrued within 
the region and, where appropriate, elsewhere.

ADB’s chief consultant and lead author for this handbook was Air Vice 
Marshal Nick Carter. In putting these guidelines together, he has drawn upon 
more than 50 years of experience: ﬁrst, during the Second World War when 
civil defense was, for many people, essential to survival; second, in civil unrest 
which is a problem that continues to plague the region; third, in strategic 
planning for the ultimate disaster, nuclear war; fourth, as director for 10 years 
of the Australian Counter Disaster College; ﬁfth, for another 12 years, as an 
international disaster consultant undertaking numerous missions throughout 
Asia and the Paciﬁc, and sixth, but by no means least, as a victim of one of the 
worst bushﬁres ever to strike Australia.

Thanks are due to the Director and staff of the Asian Disaster Preparedness 
Center at the Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand, our consultants 
for the overall exercise, who also saw to the timely completion of the handbook; 
to the Governments of the Cook Islands, Papua New Guinea, and Queensland 
that have generously permitted the reproduction of their disaster legislation 

Foreword 

XV

here; and the panel of experts who reviewed an earlier draft of the handbook: 
The Honorable Secretary Dr. Mita Pardo de Tavera (Philippines), Leith 
Anderson (Papua New Guinea), Hugh Brammer (United Kingdom), Nelson 
Delailomaloma (Fiji Islands), Charitha Ratwatte (Sri Lanka), and George Ritchie 
(United Kingdom). On the ADB’s side, the work was initiated and coordinated 
by Dr. Werner M. Schelzig of the Development Policy Ofﬁce. Their contributions 
are gratefully acknowledged.

The publication of this handbook brings ADB activities under 
TA 5353-REG, Regional Study of Disaster Mitigation, to an end. I am 
pleased to note that judging from the overwhelmingly positive response we 
have had to the regional seminar and the ﬁrst volume published, we have 
reason to believe that the ﬁndings of TA 5353-REG, as expressed in the two 
publications at hand, form a solid base for further action. ADB stands ready to 
continue its dialogue on disaster mitigation with its DMCs and in close 
cooperation with the international community, with a view to making disaster 
management an integral part of development planning in the region and a 
regular practice.

WILLIAM R. THOMSON
Vice President (Operations)

Asian Development Bank
February 1992

Introductory Notes

Concept of the Handbook

The concept of this handbook is that modern disaster management is 
very much an ongoing national requirement which is important to governments 
and peoples alike. It has special signiﬁcance today because of increasing dangers 
to the world environment.

To be effective, therefore, disaster management needs to be implemented 
as a comprehensive and continuous activity, not as a periodic reaction to 
individual disaster circumstances. Consequently, national representatives who 
are charged with disaster management responsibilities have to deal with a wide 
range of policy, planning, organizational, operational, and other matters. It is 
therefore clearly beneﬁcial if they can have access to relevant guidelines and 
advice, especially in the form of a ready-reference handbook.

Aim

The aim of the handbook is to provide a reference and guide to those 
who, within governments and outside, may hold key responsibilities for dealing 
with disaster.

Thus, its underlying purpose is to assist disaster managers in attaining 
standards of professionalism that will enable them to deal with day-to-day 
disaster management circumstances and with actual disaster situations.

Focus

The focus of the handbook is primarily on countries of Southeast Asia 
and the Paciﬁc region. It draws on factual disaster management activities 
within this region and endeavors to relate realistically to the needs of disaster 
managers within this region. Thus, the handbook is a practical reference, not a 
collection of theoretical propositions.

XVIII Disaster Management

Despite this regional focus, however, the handbook follows disaster principles 

and practices that are clearly applicable to other areas and circumstances.

Scope and Limitations

As a practical reference, the handbook is designed to cover the broad 
disaster management ﬁeld and to offer guidelines on the major segments which 
constitute that ﬁeld.

The handbook does not attempt to deal with highly specialized aspects 
that are associated with disasters such as detailed economic, technical, and 
sociological issues. These are primarily the concern of existing specialists, who 
are normally available to provide relevant advice.

Format and Style

The handbook is presented in a practical, ready-reference style. It is 
divided into major parts and its chapters aim to be as self-contained as possible, 
with adequate cross-references where necessary. Thus, the reader should ﬁnd 
the handbook simple and straightforward to use.

Also, the handbook endeavors to avoid a dogmatic approach. Instead, it 
takes an advisory line, including the offer of options and case material references 
to assist disaster managers in resolving their individual local needs. This, it is 
believed, helps in applying and utilizing past experience.

Other considerations of format and style are:
• 

 The handbook is intended to help those for whom English may be 
a second language.
 The format used should enable the handbook to be easily translated 
into other languages, where this is necessary.
 Deﬁnitions used in the handbook have been selected primarily for 
their clarity of description.
 The guidelines provided in the handbook are designed so that they 
may be easily adapted to various local circumstances.

• 

• 

• 

The Deﬁnition of Disaster

There are many different deﬁnitions of disaster. Most such deﬁnitions 

tend to reﬂect the following characteristics:

Intoductory Notes 

XIX

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Disruption to normal patterns of life. Such disruption is usually severe 
and may also be sudden, unexpected, and widespread.
 Human effects such as loss of life, injury, hardship, and adverse 
effect on health.
 Effects on social structure such as destruction of or damage to 
government systems, buildings, communications, and essential services.
 Community needs such as shelter, food, clothing, medical assistance, 
and social care.

Two dictionary deﬁnitions are:
• Concise Oxford Dictionary

 Sudden or great misfortune, calamity.

• Webster’s Dictionary

 A sudden calamitous event producing great material damage, loss, 
and distress.

The variety of deﬁnitions in use and the need for individual organizations 
to frame their own deﬁnitions, has been borne in mind during the compilation 
of this handbook. The deﬁnition used in the handbook is:

An event, natural or man-made, sudden or progressive, which impacts 
with such severity that the affected community has to respond by taking 
exceptional measures.

In relation to the deﬁnition of disaster, it has also been taken into account 
that disaster management is essentially a dynamic process. It encompasses the 
classical management functions of planning, organizing, stafﬁng, leading, and 
controlling. It also involves many organizations which must work together 
to prevent, mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from the effects of 
disaster. Disaster management is deﬁned as:

An applied science which seeks, by the systematic observation and 
analysis of disasters, to improve measures relating to prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, emergency response and recovery.

Practical Application of Disaster Deﬁnition

There is an important practical application of the deﬁnition of disaster 
in disaster management. Such deﬁnition helps provide a common concept and 
theme throughout disaster management activities. Thus, the chosen deﬁnition 
is valuable for purposes of policy, organization, planning, and legislation.

 
 
 
XX 

Disaster Management

It is suggested that individual nations and organizations should choose 

a deﬁnition that is most suitable for their purposes and apply it accordingly.

The Disaster Management Cycle

A standard cycle of disaster events has been used throughout the 

handbook. It is illustrated below:

DISASTER
IMPACT

PREPAREDNESS

RESPONSE

MITIGATION

RECOVERY

PREVENTION

DEVELOPMENT

This cycle can be represented in more detail, as explained in Chapter 5.

The cycle can be, and often is portrayed in other forms. Moreover, alternative 
terminology may be used. The important factor is that the format should indicate 
that disaster and its management is a continuum of interlinked activities; it is 
not a series of events which start and stop with each disaster occurence.

Government Structures

It is recognized that the structure of government may differ as between 
countries. For the purpose of this handbook, therefore, the following terms 
are used to differentiate generally between the various levels:

Term 
National Level 
Intermediate Level 
Community level 

Levels of Government
National or central
Provincial, state, or regional
Municipality, local government, or village

Intoductory Notes 

XXI

Relevance to Other Handbooks

During compilation of this handbook, it has been borne in mind that 
other disaster-related handbooks exist. Most of them directly relate to the 
speciﬁc roles and requirements of their issuing organizations such as:

• Red Cross
• United Nations High Commission for Refugees
• United Nations Children’s Fund, and
• 

 United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Disaster 
Relief Ofﬁce

As far as practicable, and certainly where major considerations are concerned, 
this handbook has endeavored to maintain reasonable compatibility with these 
co-references.

PART I

Basic Disaster 
Management 
Aspects

Chapter 1

The Signiﬁcance of Disaster

Purpose

1. 
The purpose of this chapter is to remind the reader of the signiﬁcance of 
disaster in today’s environment. This is in order that individual disaster 
management authorities and ofﬁcials may assess this signiﬁcance in relation to 
their own circumstances.

Introduction

2. 
The signiﬁcance of disaster in today’s environment sometimes comes under 
question. Why do we need to bother so much ? After all, disaster has been with 
us as long as recorded history, and presumably even longer. Generations of 
people have had to withstand disaster. They have suffered the consequences 
and recovered from them, and life has continued. Basically, this is true. 
However, certain factors need to be considered in relation to modern challenges 
which face disaster management.

The Traditional Disaster Threat

3. 
There has not been very much reduction in what might be called the 
traditional disaster threat. Most of the old problems remain, as threatening as 
ever. Natural phenomena such as earthquakes, cyclones, volcanic eruptions, 
tsunamis, wildﬁres, ﬂoods, landslides, and drought still persist. So do their basic 
man-made counterparts such as major accidents. These disasters continue to 
cause grievous human casualties, economic and social loss, and damage to 
the environment. It is certainly true that we have learned to cope with these 
problems to some extent. But we have neither eliminated nor contained them. 
So while we may have modiﬁed their effects in various ways, they continue 
to inﬂict unacceptable pressure on a world population which, in terms of total 
subsistence, is already ﬁnding it difﬁcult to make ends meet.

4. 
In fact, some long-standing threats have grown more severe. For 
example, the risk from air disaster was insigniﬁcant in the 1920s. Few aircraft 
were in the air and a collision between two of them would have killed only a 

4 

Disaster Management

handful of people at most. Now, as the 20th century comes to a close, the air 
disaster risk has increased enormously. More and more aircraft ﬁll the already 
overcrowded airspaces of the world, especially around capital cities. A collision 
between two of them can be catastrophic. In 1977, a collision in the Azores 
between two passenger-carrying jets resulted in the deaths of 561 people. 
One aircraft was still on the ground at the time. In 1988, 270 people lost their 
lives following the terrorist sabotage of an airliner over Scotland.

5. With some of the other long-standing threats, we ourselves have added 
to the risks. An increasing population alone has forced people to live in disaster-
prone areas which, previously, would not have been regarded as habitable. This 
fact tends to apply particularly to developing countries. For instance, human 
settlement has been allowed to develop not only in ﬂood-prone areas of major 
river systems, but also on low atoll islands which are subject to inundation from 
the sea. The chain effects are sometimes disturbing. Sea inundation can cause 
over-salinity of crop-growing land, food shortages follow, and populations 
may be forced into crises of subsistence or even famine—leading perhaps to 
migration and refugee problems.

6. What is often seen as progress can, in fact, represent a backward step. In 
some cyclone-prone countries, traditional building construction—designed to 
cope with high winds—has been modiﬁed. Increased population has led to 
the need for more water, so tin rooﬁng has been introduced to enhance water 
collection. But a piece of iron rooﬁng, ripped off a house by cyclonic winds, and 
moving at 100 kilometers an hour, is a very lethal weapon that is just as 
capable of killing people as any modern weapons system. Traditional building 
materials posed no such threat because most were made of lightweight wood 
or similar substances.

The New Disaster Threats

A second factor which bears upon today’s situation is that new disaster 

7. 
threats have developed, particularly since World War II.

Increased social violence has drastically affected many nations 
8. 
and communities. Highjacking, terrorism, civil unrest, and conﬂict with 
conventional arms have become commonplace. These have sometimes 
inﬂicted intolerable burdens on government and societies whose existence is 
already precarious because of poor economic and social conditions. This, in 
turn, has produced additional strains on international assistance sources, thus 
diluting global counter-disaster efforts and capabilities.

The Signiﬁcance of Disaster 

5

9. 
New threats have also come from what are generally termed hazardous 
materials or substances. The 1985 tragedy of Bhopal in India ranks paramount 
in this category with an estimated death toll of 2,500 and 100,000 affected 
in various ways. But the Bhopals of this world are, in many ways, only the 
highly publicized tip of this particular disaster iceberg. Hazardous materials 
are shifted around the transport systems of the world in increasing amounts. 
They are sometimes dumped in areas which are vital to the world’s future. 
These materials can constitute a disaster threat that is potentially comparable 
to those posed by many natural phenomena.

10. The threat from atomic and nuclear sources poses yet another modern 
problem for disaster management. The 1986 Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
explosion in the former Soviet Union highlighted the extent and severity of 
this problem. Apart from those killed and affected by radiation sickness, some 
135,000 people had to be evacuated from the area. Radioactive effects from the 
disaster were measured as far away as 1,600 miles and more. These peacetime 
nuclear problems are likely to persist in a world that increasingly searches for 
new and greater sources of energy.

11. While the threat from nuclear accidents is disturbing enough, the disaster 
management problems arising from a possible nuclear war are almost beyond 
comprehension. The possibility of a global nuclear war may have receded in 
recent years, but the possibility of nuclear weapons being used in some lesser 
form of conﬂict cannot be disregarded altogether. Also, it would be unwise 
to rule out entirely the use of such weapons by fanatical extremist factions. 
Furthermore, if a country was not directly involved in such nuclear conﬂict or 
terrorism, it could well suffer severely from radioactive side effects.

12. 
In sum, therefore, new disaster threats can contain some unwelcome 
characteristics in that they may have extremely far-ranging effects and, at the same 
time, be difﬁcult to counter.

The Geography of Disaster

13. A third factor concerns what might be called the geography of disaster. It 
has often been pointed out that most of the world’s worst disasters tend to 
occur between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn and that, 
coincidentally, this area contains the poorer countries.1 Of course, a major 
signiﬁcance of this is that such countries ﬁnd themselves facing repeated 
setbacks to progress. Indeed, some countries seem destined to remain within 

1

See, for instance, Cuny, Frederick C. 1983. Disasters and Development. New York: Oxford University Press.

6 

Disaster Management

the developing category primarily because of the severity and magnitude of 
their disasters. Seen in this light, therefore, disaster can be a strong aggravating 
factor in the differences between wealthy and poor nations—that is, between 
the “haves” and the “have-nots.”

The Modern Loss Factor

14. The fourth factor is the relationship between contemporary disaster 
threat and the losses it may impose. The simple fact is that the more nations 
develop and the more assets they build up, the more they stand to lose. It 
follows that any action which can be taken to reduce disaster-related loss must be 
seen as logical and desirable in cost–beneﬁt terms. This applies to all countries—
rich or poor—and it underlines the need for all countries to try to develop and 
maintain an effective disaster management capability that is appropriate to their 
needs. It also underlines the necessity of coordinated international action 
to strengthen all aspects of disaster management, wherever this is possible. 
In this regard, the initiation under the auspices of the United Nations of an 
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction during the 1990s must be 
seen as a progressive and highly commendable step.

Major Aspects of Signiﬁcance

Following from the foregoing paragraphs in this chapter, the signiﬁcance 
15. 
of disaster can perhaps best be summarized in global, national, and practical 
disaster management terms.

In global terms, unless disaster can be mitigated and managed to the 
16. 
optimum extent possible, it will continue to have a dominating effect on the 
future. The world is already facing a range of environmental and subsistence crises. 
Disaster mitigation should be regarded as an important tool in successfully coping 
with these crises. Moreover, the political, economic, and social stability of the 
world depends signiﬁcantly on bridging the gap between developing and 
developed nations. Mitigating and containing the effects of disaster on the 
developing nations now and in the future is an important asset toward bridging 
this gap. The continuation and enhancement of international disaster assistance 
is also a key factor. Correctly applied, such assistance can help provide a 
desirable bonding between nations, and thus, produce welcome and beneﬁcial 
long-term results.

17. 

In national terms, the impact of disaster usually results in two major setbacks:

• First, the direct loss of existing national assets in various forms.

The Signiﬁcance of Disaster 

7

• Second, the diversion of national resources and effort away from 
ongoing subsistence and development to achieve satisfactory recovery.

This indicates that nations need to develop a comprehensive approach to disaster 
management. Only by such an approach can they hope to deal effectively with 
the two major setbacks stated above. To be effective, this comprehensive approach 
clearly needs to cover all aspects of the disaster management cycle and needs to 
include an appropriate balance of prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, 
recovery, and disaster-related development. In the past, some nations have not 
achieved this balance. They have, for various reasons, concentrated on post-
impact relief and rehabilitation. Consequently, little or no alleviation from the 
impact of future disasters has been achieved. It is true that improvements 
can result from disasters (the “disaster-as-a-beneﬁt syndrome”). However, this 
does not reduce the need for a comprehensive approach. Such an approach, 
because of its interrelationship with national development, is more likely to 
ensure that potential beneﬁts from disaster are realized.

18. 
In practical disaster management terms, the overriding need is for an accurate 
and precise focus on the requirements at any given level of government. There 
is seldom scope, or indeed need, for fancy trimmings in such things as 
organizational structure and operational concepts. On the contrary, it is vital to 
deﬁne unambiguously key aspects such as:

• Possible threats,
• Resources available,
• Organizational requirements,
• Planning needs,
• Action required in relation to sectors of the disaster management 

cycle, and
• Training.

If this deﬁnition is correctly made and acted upon, a lean and efﬁcient concept 
of countermeasures should be achievable. This should result in a system 
in which both government and nongovernment organizations (NGOs) are 
blended to provide a thoroughly professional disaster management capability.

19. 
In this chapter, the signiﬁcance of disaster has, intentionally, been covered 
in limited form only. Its wider ramiﬁcations are developed in various other parts 
of the handbook.

Chapter 2

The Disaster Threat

Purpose

1. 

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the following:

• general effects of disaster,
• characteristics of various types of disaster,
• general countermeasures, and
• 

special problem areas for disaster management.

It is important for disaster managers to analyze the effects of disasters in 
relation to their own local circumstances. Through such analysis, it is possible 
to deﬁne, in advance, many of the requirements which apply to the disaster 
management cycle. This is especially valuable for anticipating action needed 
for response and recovery.

Types of Disaster

2. 

The following types of disaster are covered in this chapter:

• Earthquake,
• Volcanic eruption,
• Tsunami,
• Tropical cyclone (typhoon, hurricane),
• Flood,
• Landslide,
• Bushﬁre (or wildﬁre),
• Drought,
• Epidemic,
• Major accident, and
• Civil unrest.

3. Wartime civil defense or protection measures have not been speciﬁcally 
included. It has been assumed that the kind of disaster management measures 

10 

Disaster Management

advocated throughout the handbook would be broadly applicable to most 
wartime civil defense requirements. These measures could then be augmented 
or expanded by individual governments, as considered necessary.

The General Effects of Disaster

4. 

Generally, typical effects of disasters may be:

• Loss of life,
• 
Injury,
• Damage to and destruction of property,
• Damage to and destruction of subsistence and cash crops,
• Disruption of production,
• Disruption of lifestyle,
• Loss of livelihood,
• Disruption to essential services,
• 

 Damage to national infrastructure and disruption to governmental 
systems,

• National economic loss, and
• Sociological and psychological after effects.

Most if not all of the above effects could be expected from the types of 

5. 
disaster listed in the previous page.

6. 
In paragraphs 7–18, where the separate types of disaster are covered in 
more detail, some speciﬁc effects (additional to those in paragraph 4) have been 
included.

Outlines of Individual Disasters

7. 

Earthquake

Characteristics

• 

 Usually no warning. However, following a major earthquake, 
secondary shocks may warn of a further earthquake.

• Speed of onset usually sudden.
• Earthquake-prone areas are generally well identiﬁed and well-known.
• 

 Major effects (see also paragraph 4) arise mainly from land 
movement, fracture, or slippage; speciﬁcally, they include damage 
(usually very severe) to structures and systems and considerable 
casualties due to lack of warning.

The Disaster Threat 

11

General countermeasures

• Developing possible warning indicators,
• Land-use regulations,
• Building regulations,
• Relocating communities, and
• Public awareness and education programs.

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

 Severe and extensive damage, creating the need for urgent 
countermeasures, especially search and rescue, and medical assistance;

• Difﬁculty of access and movement;
• 

 Widespread loss of or damage to infrastructure, essential services, 
and life-support systems;
 Recovery requirements (e.g., restoration and rebuilding) may be very 
extensive and costly; and
 Rarity of occurrence in some areas may cause problems for economies 
of countermeasures and public awareness.

• 

• 

8. 

Volcanic Eruption

Characteristics

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Volcanoes which are likely to constitute a disaster threat are 
internationally well documented and, in many cases, monitored for 
possible activity. Usually, therefore, major eruptions can be predicted.
 Volcanic blast can destroy structures and environmental surrounds, 
and also cause ﬁres, possibly including forest ﬁres.
 Land surface cracking, resulting from volcanic explosion, may affect 
buildings and other structures.
 Lava ﬂow can bury buildings and crops. It may also cause ﬁres and 
render land unusable.

• Ash, in its airborne form, can affect aircraft by ingestion into engines.
• 

 Ground deposit of ash may destroy crops and also affect land use 
and water supplies.

• Ash may also cause respiratory problems.
• Mud ﬂows may arise from associated heavy rain.

12 

Disaster Management

General countermeasures

• Land-use regulations,
• Lava control systems,
• Developing a monitoring and warning system,
• Evacuation plans and arrangements,
• Relocating the population, and
• Public awareness and education programs.

Special problems areas for disaster management

• Access during eruption.
• Timely and accurate evacuation decision(s).
• 

 Public apathy, especially if there is a history of false alarms or small 
eruptions. Thus, it may be difﬁcult to maintain public awareness 
and also to implement evacuation plans.
 Control of incoming sightseers when evacuation programs are being 
implemented.

• 

9. 

Tsunami (Seismic Sea Wave)

Characteristics

• 

 The velocity of the wave depends on the depth of water where the 
seismic disturbance occurs. Initial wave velocity may be as high as 
900 kilometer per hour (kph) (560 miles per hour [mph]), slowing 
to approximately 50 kph (31 mph) as the wave strikes land.

• Warning time depends on the distance from the point of wave origin.
• Speed of onset varies (see above).
• 

 Impact on a shoreline can be preceded by a marked recession of 
normal water level prior to the arrival of a wave. This can result in 
a massive outgoing tide, followed by the incoming tsunami wave. 
People may be trapped when they investigate the phenomenon of 
the outgoing tide and then be struck by the incoming wave.
 The tsunami wave can be very destructive; wave heights of 30 meters 
have been known.
 Impact can cause ﬂooding; saltwater contamination of crops, soil, 
and water supplies; and destruction of or damage to buildings, 
structures, and shoreline vegetation.

• 

• 

General countermeasures

The Disaster Threat 

13

• Optimum arrangements for receipt and dissemination of warning;
• 

 Evacuating threatened communities from sea level/low-level areas 
to high ground, if sufﬁcient warning is available;
 Land-use regulations (but these are likely to be difﬁcult to implement 
if the tsunami risk is perceived as rare); and
• Public awareness and education programs.

• 

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

 Timely dissemination of warning because of the possible short period 
between receipt of warning and the arrival of the tsunami wave;

• Effective evacuation time-scale;
• Search and rescue; and
• 

 Recovery problem may be extensive and costly because of severe 
destruction and damage.

10. Tropical Cyclone (Typhoon, Hurricane)

Characteristics

• 

 Usually long warning, derived from systematic international 
meteorological observation (including remote sensing);

• Speed of onset gradual;
• Tends to conform to seasonal pattern;
• 

 Major effects arise mainly from destructive force winds, storm surge 
(producing inundation), and ﬂooding from intense rainfall. 
Landslides may follow ﬂooding and heavy rainfall; and
 Destruction and/or severe damage to buildings and other structures, 
roads, essential services, crops, and the environment generally. 
Major loss of life and livestock may occur.

• 

General countermeasures

• Effective warning arrangements;
• 

 Precautionary measures during warning period (e.g., boarding up 
buildings, closing public facilities);

• Moving people to safe shelters;
• 

 General readiness and cleanup measures prior to an expected 
cyclone season (especially to reduce the risk of ﬂying objects);

• Building regulations, and
• Public education and awareness.

14 

Disaster Management

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

• 

• 

 Assessing effects and needs may be difﬁcult, especially due to bad 
weather following the impact of main disaster and to problems of 
access and movement caused by high damage levels;
 Widespread destruction or loss of counter-disaster resources (e.g., 
transport, emergency food and medical supplies, shelter materials);
 Difﬁculty of access and movement in carrying out urgent relief 
operations, especially emergency feeding, shelter and medical 
assistance programs;

• Search and rescue;
• Widespread destruction/disruption of essential services;
• Evacuating; and
• Rehabilitating agriculture, especially tree crops.

11. Flood

Characteristics

• 

 Long, short, or no warning, depending on the type of ﬂood (e.g., 
ﬂooding within parts of a major river system may develop over a 
number of days or even weeks, whereas ﬂashﬂoods may give no 
usable warning);

• Speed of onset may be gradual or sudden;
• There may be seasonal patterns to ﬂooding; and
• 

 Major effects arise mainly from inundation and erosion; speciﬁcally, 
they may include isolation of communities or areas, and involve the 
need for large-scale evacuation.

General countermeasures

• Flood control (e.g., by walls, gates, dams, dikes, and levees);
• Land-use regulations;
• Building regulations;
• Forecasting, monitoring, and warning system(s);
• Relocating population;
• Planning and arranging evacuation;
• 

 Emergency equipment, facilities, and materials such as special 
ﬂoodboats, sandbags, supplies of sand, and designated volunteers 
who will implement emergency measures; and

• Public awareness and education programs.

The Disaster Threat 

15

Special problem areas for disaster management

• Difﬁculties of access and movement;
• Rescue;
• Medical and health difﬁculties (e.g., arising from sanitation problems);
• Evacuating;
• Loss of relief supplies; and
• Large-scale relief may be required until next crop harvest.

12. Landslide

Characteristics

• 

 Warning period may vary. Little or no warning may be available if 
the cause is an earthquake. However, some general warning may 
be assumed in the case of landslide arising from continuous heavy 
rain. Minor initial landslips may give warning that heavy landslides 
are to follow. Natural movement of land surface can be monitored, 
thus providing long warning of possibility of landslides.

• Speed of onset is mostly rapid.
• 

 Damage to structures and systems can be severe (buildings may be 
buried or villages swept away).

• Rivers may be blocked, causing ﬂooding.
• 

 Crops may be affected. Sometimes areas of crop-producing land 
may be lost altogether (e.g., in the major slippage of surface soils 
from a mountainside).
 When landslides are combined with very heavy rain and ﬂooding, 
the movement of debris (e.g., remains of buildings, uprooted trees) 
may cause high levels of damage and destruction.

• 

General countermeasures

• Land-use and building regulations;
• Monitoring systems, where applicable;
• 

 Evacuating and/or relocating communities. Relocation has proved 
successful where crop-growing land areas have been lost; and

• Public awareness programs.

Special problem areas for disaster management

• Difﬁculties of access and movement in affected areas;
• Search and rescue;

16 

Disaster Management

• Risk of follow-up landslides may hamper response operations;
• 

 Relocation, as distinct from temporary evacuation, may be resisted 
by indigenous communities;

• Rehabilitation and recovery may be complex and costly; and
• 

 In severe cases, it may not be possible and/or cost-effective to 
rehabilitate the area for organized human settlement.

13. Bushﬁre (or Wildﬁre)

Characteristics

• Most bushﬁre-prone areas are well-known and well deﬁned.
• Bushﬁre threat tends to be seasonal.
• 

 Speed of onset may vary. It can be rapid under conditions of high 
temperatures and high wind, when major ﬁre fronts advance very 
quickly. Also, fragments of ﬁre from a main front may be carried 
forward by the wind, starting new ﬁres further ahead. This is 
sometimes known as “spotting.”
 Effects can be very destructive, especially in loss of buildings, timber, 
and livestock (and human life if counter-disaster arrangements 
are inadequate).

• 

• Recovery from effects on the environment may take several years.
• 

 Evacuating communities may be difﬁcult and dangerous in the face 
of a major ﬁre front.

General countermeasures

• Accurate risk assessment;
• 

 Effective monitoring and warning systems, including remote sensing 
to deﬁne “curing” or dryingout of vegetation;

• Fire prevention regulations;
• Seasonal mitigation measures (e.g., fuel reduction);
• Building regulations; and
• 

 Public awareness and education programs, especially to ensure 
that individuals, families, and communities cooperate in applying 
measures for prevention and mitigation, and especially that they 
maintain adequate standards of preparedness during the high- 
risk season.

Special problem areas for disaster management

The Disaster Threat 

17

• Maintaining adequate community awareness and preparedness;
• The arsonist problem is difﬁcult to counter;
• 

 Establishing and maintaining adequate ﬁreﬁghting resources, 
especially if the threat is spasmodic;
 Establishing an adequate warning system, particularly the meaning 
of signals (e.g., sirens) and their interpretation by threatened 
communities;
 Timely dissemination of warning and, if applicable, decision to 
evacuate;
 Long-term recovery may be prolonged due to high levels of 
environmental damage and destruction; and
 Evacuation movements, either out of affected areas or to safe havens 
within such areas.

• 

• 

• 

• 

14. Drought

Characteristics

• Major areas liable to drought are usually well-known;
• Periods of drought can be prolonged;
• Area(s) affected may be very large;
• Long warning;
• 

 Effects on agriculture, livestock, rural industry production, and 
human habitation may be severe. This may lead to prolonged food 
shortages or famine;
 Long-term effects can be in the form of severe economic loss, erosion 
which affects future habitation and production, and sometimes 
abandonment of large tracts of land;
 Man-made activities may aggravate the possibility and extent of the 
drought problem (e.g., overgrazing of agricultural land, destruction 
of forests or similar areas); and
 The inability and/or unwillingness of the population to move from 
 drought-prone areas may exacerbate the problem.

• 

• 

• 

General countermeasures

• 

• 

 There are few, if any, quick and easy solutions to the drought 
problem; effective countermeasures tend to be mostly long term;
 The long-term resolution of drought problems usually rests with 
national governments and involves major policy decisions;

18 

Disaster Management

• 

• 

 Since these decisions involve human settlement, they are often 
sensitive and difﬁcult ones;
 International cooperation and assistance usually play an important 
part in coping with major drought problems;

• Land management and special plans (e.g., for irrigation);
• 

 Response to drought-caused emergencies usually includes providing 
food and water supply, medical and health assistance (including 
monitoring of sanitation and possibility of epidemic), and emergency 
accommodation (may be on an organized camp or similar basis); and
 Information programs, especially to assist aspects such as land 
management.

• 

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

• 

• 

 Response requirements (e.g., feeding programs) may be extensive 
and prolonged, thus involving major commitment and expenditure 
of resources.
 Prolonged drought may undermine self-reliance of affected 
communities, thus making it difﬁcult to withdraw disaster 
management assistance.
 Logistic requirements may exceed in-country capability, particularly 
if large inputs of outside (international) commodities are involved.

15. Epidemic

Characteristics

• 

• 

 Disaster-related epidemic arises generally from the disrupted living 
conditions which follow disaster impact.
 Epidemic may arise from:

food sources;
water sources;
inadequate medical and health facilities/standards;
malnutrition; and
 vector-borne sources (e.g., mosquitoes).

• Types of disease include:

hepatitis,
typhoid,
diptheria,
malaria,
cholera,
inﬂuenza,
enteritis,

The Disaster Threat 

19

diarrhea,
skin diseases, and
food poisoning.

• 

 Under post-impact conditions, when personnel and facilities may 
be limited, outbreaks may prove difﬁcult to contain and control. 
This may particularly apply if community health education is 
substandard.
 Warning (i.e., risk) is self-evident in most post-impact circumstances.

• 
• Speed of onset is mostly rapid.

General countermeasures

• 

 An effective medical and health sub-plan within the overall local 
or area counter-disaster plan. This medical and health plan needs 
particularly to cover preparedness measures and the capability to 
deal with post-disaster eventualities;

• Close post-disaster monitoring of medical and health aspects;
• 

 Reinforcement of medical resources and supplies in anticipation of 
epidemic outbreak; and
 Public awareness and education, both before and after disaster 
impact.

• 

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

• 
• 

• 

 Loss of medical and health resources (e.g., clinics, medical supplies) 
during disaster impact (e.g., by a cyclone) may inhibit response 
capability;
 In-country shortage of special equipment (e.g., water purifying plant).
 Integrating outside (international) medical and health assistance 
with local systems; and
 Containing and controlling common diseases (e.g., enteritis and 
diarrhea) which can have a mass effect, especially if relevant medical 
and health resources are severely limited.

16. Major Accident

Characteristics

• 

• 

 Usually violent in nature (e.g., industrial or other explosion, aircraft 
crash, major ﬁre, train collision);
 Can have limited or widespread effect (e.g., an aircraft crash may 
affect only those on board, whereas an explosion involving hazardous 
chemicals may affect a wide area of the population);

20 

Disaster Management

• 

 Mostly limited or no warning, though there may be longer warning 
of effects of, say, chemical or oil spill; and

• Speed of onset usually rapid.

General countermeasures

• 

 Good physical planning (e.g., the siting of potentially accident-prone 
buildings or complexes);

• Special building regulations, if applicable;
• 

 Good in-house safety and management standards/procedures, 
including evacuation plans and periodic tests;
 Effective organizational emergency services (e.g., ﬁre services and 
rescue teams) which are available to immediately respond prior to 
the arrival of public emergency services;
 Effective community or area disaster plans so that coordinated 
response can be achieved; and

• 

• 

• Training in handling the effects of speciﬁc hazards.

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

• 

• 

 Unexpected nature of accidents may pose problems of reaction and 
response time;
 Response problems may be severe, extensive, and difﬁcult (e.g., 
rescue from a building collapse, or in circumstances where a 
chemical or radiation hazard exists, or where there are multiple 
casualties such as in a major rail accident); and
Identifying victim may be difﬁcult in some cases.

17. Civil Unrest

Characteristics

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Usually the responsibility of police, paramilitary, and armed forces. 
However, other emergency services such as ﬁre services, medical 
authorities, and welfare agencies become involved;
 Violent and disruptive activities occur (e.g., bombing, armed 
clashes, mob demonstrations, and violence);
 Patterns of civil unrest are difﬁcult to predict. Therefore, effective 
warning may also be difﬁcult;
 In many civil unrest circumstances, especially terrorism, the 
instigators have the initiative, thus complicating the task of law 
enforcement authorities.

General countermeasures

The Disaster Threat 

21

• Firmly applying law and order regulations and requirements;
• 

 Imposing special emergency measures and regulations (e.g., 
restricted movement, curfews, and security checks); and
 Positive information programs aimed at maintaining majority public 
support for government action against disruptive elements/factions.

• 

Special problem areas for disaster management

• 

• 

 Overloading of resource organizations (e.g., medical authorities, 
welfare agencies, and essential services) because of demands of civil 
unrest incidents, in addition to normal commitments; and
 Difﬁculty of 
integrating “peacetime” resource organizations 
(noncombatant in nature) with “military type” operations which are 
necessary to deal with violent civil unrest.

18. Other Disasters

In some countries, disasters in addition to those listed in paragraph 2 of 
this chapter may apply (e.g., severe outbreaks of animal diseases that threaten 
rural industries, food production, and so on). In such cases, it is suggested that 
disaster managers should assess the particular disaster(s) along the above lines.

Process of Deﬁning the Disaster Threat

19. There can be variations in the process by which disaster management 
authorities and associated scientiﬁc and technical agencies deﬁne the threat 
from any particular form of disaster. Also, the capability to deﬁne disaster 
threats accurately is likely to vary between different countries. This depends 
on the standards of disaster management and other disaster-related activities, 
including study and research.

20. However, a basic theme or pattern comprises the following main areas 
of action:

• 
• 

Identifying the hazards;
 Assessing the vulnerability of settlements, communities, and assets 
to relevant hazards; and

• Evaluating the risks.

22 

Disaster Management

21. 

Identifying Hazards

A hazard can be generally described as a threatening event. It may take 
the form of a natural phenomenon, such as a possible cyclone, or it may be 
basically artiﬁcial, such as the accidental release of a hazardous substance 
from an industrial complex. The process of identifying hazards obviously 
involves carefully surveying the country or region concerned. This survey may 
require inputs from a variety of specialist agencies and authorities, including 
information on past disaster-related events. Usually, this identiﬁcation process 
includes hazard mapping, which establishes geographically where natural 
and artiﬁcial hazards may occur. The relationship of these hazards to human 
settlements and institutions then provides a valuable indication of the risks 
that may be involved.

22. Assessing Vulnerability

For the foregoing identiﬁcation of hazards, it becomes possible to 
identify—with reasonable accuracy—those settlements, communities, and 
assets that are especially vulnerable to disaster-caused damage or destruction.

23. Evaluating Risk

Risk has 

two dimensions, 

frequency and magnitude/intensity. 
Evaluating risk is done by relating a natural or artiﬁcial hazard to the primary 
characteristics (e.g., population distribution and development aspects) and 
vulnerability of the area concerned. This process particularly identiﬁes high-
risk areas and is the basis for producing risk maps. For example, risk mapping 
of a bushﬁre-prone area would indicate the likelihood of ﬁres occurring and 
the degree to which those ﬁres would affect communities within the area. 
Similarly, for a ﬂood-prone area, risk mapping would show the likely levels of 
inundation for various ﬂood intensities.

Use of Disaster Threat Information

24. The hazard, vulnerability, and risk information in paragraphs 19–23 
above is, of course, only an outline of what is a detailed and extensive procedure. 
However, it serves to illustrate the value of disaster threat information, as 
applied to practical disaster management. For instance, it is suggested that 
the information in this chapter should be used and, indeed, is essential for 
the following:

• 

 The formulation of disaster plans, especially the measures within 
such plans that deal with preparedness, response, and recovery.

The Disaster Threat 

23

• 

• 

• 

 The formulation of relevant programs for disaster-related training 
and public awareness;
 The deﬁnition and application of measures that can reduce 
vulnerability in speciﬁc cases/areas; and
 Formulation and use of long-term programs of mitigation and 
prevention.

Further Information

25. 
Further relevant information is contained in Appendix A which 
deals with vulnerability analysis. However, as indicated in paragraph 19, 
there can be variations in the process of deﬁning threats. Therefore, users of 
this handbook should consider local circumstances and factors when using 
the process.

Chapter 3

National Disaster 
Management Policy

Purpose

1. 

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the following:

• need to clearly deﬁne a national disaster management policy;
• process for deﬁning this policy;
• main elements of such a policy; and
• arrangements for monitoring and reviewing the national policy

Clear Deﬁnition of National Policy

2. 
Clear deﬁnition of national disaster management policy is essential if 
a country is to establish and maintain adequate arrangements to deal with 
all aspects of its disaster threat. This applies to all levels of the national 
structure and organization—that is, from the national government to the local 
government or community level. If such a policy does not exist, arrangements 
to deal with disaster will be ill-deﬁned and inadequate. Consequently, loss of 
material and human resources will arise; the nation, as a whole, will suffer.

3. 

A strong and clear policy offers most, if not all, of the following advantages:

• demonstrated lead from government in disaster-related affairs;
foundation for appropriate legislation and associated regulations;
• 
 basis for sound organization and clear allocation of responsibilities;
• 
 overall direction for ensuring optimum use of resources against a 
• 
carefully assessed threat; and
 national competence and self-reliance that is likely to engender 
optimum international assistance when the need arises.

• 

26 

Disaster Management

The Process of Policy Deﬁnition

To deﬁne a national disaster management policy, it is necessary to 
4. 
consider certain main factors or pillars. For most countries, the following will 
usually apply:

 identifying the effects which are likely to be caused by the threat;

• deﬁning accurately the disaster threat;
• 
• assessing the resources available to deal with the threat;
• 

 organizational arrangements which are required to prepare for, 
respond to, and recover from disaster events;
 deﬁning how a national disaster management policy interlocks with 
other aspects of national policy, especially those concerned with 
national development and protection of the environment;
• any other speciﬁc national factors which may be applicable.

• 

5. 

The Disaster Threat and Likely Effects

Information on the disaster threat and on the effects likely to arise from 
disaster is contained in Chapter 2. However, for purposes of deﬁning national 
policy, these two aspects would need to be carefully reviewed. This is necessary 
to ensure that a correct relationship is established between the threat and 
its effects on the one hand, and the policy itself on the other hand. This is 
particularly relevant to the selection of policy options (paragraphs 10–11) and 
to the priorities within the national policy which are given to these options. 
For instance, from a purely disaster management viewpoint, the most effective 
countermeasure to a ﬂood threat may be a policy of prevention based on an 
extensive ﬂood control system. However, when it comes to national policy, 
preventive measures of this kind may not be ﬁnancially feasible.

6. 

Assessing Available Resources

Obviously, it is no use framing a national disaster management policy 
which is beyond the capacity of available resources. The reverse sense applies; 
that is, national policy has to be balanced with the various existing resources 
in terms of equipment, facilities, and personnel. In assessing resources, it is 
essential to consider the widest range of both government organizations and 
NGOs. It is also reasonable to take into account resources which are likely to 
be forthcoming from international sources. Further information concerning 
counter-disaster resources is contained in Chapter 8.

National Disaster Management Policy 

27

7. Organizational Arrangements

It is generally accepted that the primary responsibility for dealing with 
disaster must rest with national government. In addition, an important disaster 
management concept is to ensure optimum use of existing resources, the 
majority of which tend to be under government direction. It follows, therefore, 
that the organizational arrangements needed for dealing with disaster (both 
before, during, and after a disaster) are best based on the government structure. 
Indeed, experience has shown that it is neither wise nor effective to try to 
switch to some special organizational arrangements for disaster purposes.

Most countries, therefore, use their existing government structure as the 
basis for dealing with disaster. They then augment this by establishing such 
specialized agencies or sections as may be deemed necessary; for example, 
a National Disaster Council (NDC) for policy purposes, a National Disaster 
Management Ofﬁce (NDMO) for day-to-day working affairs, and appropriate 
sections at lower levels of government.

Thus, in framing a national disaster management policy, these organizational 
aspects must be carefully considered and included in the relevant policy 
statement. In this regard, it is usually prudent to frame the policy so that minor 
adjustments to organizational arrangements can be made without having to 
amend the policy itself.

8. 

 Interrelation of National Disaster Management Policy with 
Other National Policies

It is well understood and recognized that governments in most countries 
are, of necessity, concerned with a whole range of major policy areas. These 
usually include economic and social development, health, education, and so 
on. Such major policy areas will, necessarily, be prioritized from a government 
standpoint. It is unrealistic, therefore, to expect that disaster management 
policy will be prioritized, for instance, in allocating funding and resources 
that cannot be positively justiﬁed.

Therefore, those responsible for drafting and formulating a national disaster 
policy must aim to achieve an appropriate balance and interrelationship with 
other national policies. This obviously involves carefully considering these other 
policies, especially with a view to ensuring as far as possible the compatibility 
of interest. Indeed, in some cases, it may be that an astute disaster management 
policy can offer advantages to other national policies. Where this is so, mutual 
support and the advantages that this brings is likely forthcoming.

28 

Disaster Management

Two areas of government policy tend to have mutual interests with disaster 
management. They are:

• National development – Disaster and national development are, in 
reality, closely related. This especially applies if the disaster threat is 
signiﬁcant. For instance, national development planning needs to 
consider the possible effects that disaster may have on the various 
programs and projects involved. In turn, however, such programs 
and projects may affect the nation’s ability to cope with disaster 
because while some of them may reduce risk and vulnerability, 
others can actually increase it. In addition, disaster events often 
open subsequent possibilities of improving various aspects of 
progress and development. This is known as the “disaster-as-a-
beneﬁt syndrome,” as already mentioned in Chapter 1. These 
improvements and beneﬁts may be possible in various ﬁelds of 
activity; for instance, building standards, transport systems, town 
planning, and so on.

• Protection of the environment – Widespread international concern 
has prompted most national governments to direct particular 
attention toward protecting the environment. Since much disaster 
management activity is concerned with environmental aspects (e.g., 
ﬂood, drought, cyclone) it is sensible to maintain close collaboration 
between disaster management and environmental policies. Indeed, 
some countries are already moving toward a single integrated policy 
for disaster and the environment.

It is suggested that these two policy areas illustrate the need for and beneﬁt 
from a disaster management policy that is appropriately interrelated with other 
policies. Disaster management ofﬁcials, especially at national government 
level, would therefore be well advised to regard this concept as being of key 
importance whenever disaster policy is being formulated or reviewed.

9. Other Factors

It may be that—in addition to the factors discussed in paragraphs 4–8 
above—others are relevant to individual country circumstances. Therefore, 
before embarking on the drafting of a national policy, disaster management 
ofﬁcials should conduct a careful survey to identify any such additional factors.

National Disaster Management Policy 

29

Main Elements of National Policy

10. Options Available

In identifying what options are available as elements of national policy, 
it is useful to study the disaster management cycle, which is discussed in the 
introductory notes and Chapter 5. From these sources, it will be readily seen 
that all segments of the cycle are possible elements, as follows: prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery, and development.

These segments should be scrutinized against the following deﬁnitions (or 
alternative deﬁnitions if the latter appear more suitable for a particular national 
policy).

• Prevention – Measures aimed at impeding the occurrence of a disaster 
and/or preventing such an occurrence having harmful effects on 
communities. Constructing a dam or levee to control ﬂoodwaters is an 
example of a preventive measure. Controlled burning off in a bushﬁre-
prone area prior to the high-risk season is another example.

• Mitigation – Action taken (usually in the form of speciﬁc programs) 
to reduce the effects of a disaster on a nation or community. For 
instance, developing and applying building codes can reduce 
damage and loss in the event of earthquakes and cyclones. The 
term normally implies that while it may be possible to prevent some 
disaster effects, other effects will persist and can be modiﬁed or 
reduced if appropriate action is taken.

• Preparedness – Measures which enable governments, communities, 
and individuals to respond rapidly and effectively to disaster 
situations. Preparedness measures include formulating viable 
 counter-disaster plans, maintaining inventories of resources, and 
training of personnel.

• Response – Response measures are usually those taken immediately 
prior to and following disaster impact. They are directed toward 
saving life, protecting property, and dealing with the immediate 
damage and other effects caused by the disaster.

• Recovery – The process by which communities and the nation are 
assisted in returning to their proper levels of functioning following 
a disaster. The recovery process can be very protracted, taking 5–10 

30 

Disaster Management

years or even more. Recovery is usually taken as including other 
aspects such as restoration and reconstruction.

• Development – The progressive advancement and modernization of 
societies, in this case as it interrelates with the effects of disaster and 
with disaster management.

11. Choice of Options

It is clear from the foregoing deﬁnitions that there is little real option 
or choice in the case of preparedness, response, and recovery, and that these 
must be covered in national policy to the best possible extent. Thus, they 
constitute option priorities 1–3 of a national policy. In fact, some countries 
—initially, at any rate—have found it necessary to limit their national policy 
to these three options, largely because of ﬁnancial considerations.

The other aspects are best considered and selected against the following criteria, 
and probably in the order of option shown below. However, it is emphasized 
that individual national circumstances might require different priorities from 
the ones suggested. For instance, it might be highly important to implement 
a speciﬁc ﬂood prevention program to protect a vital national production or 
other asset.

• Development – Option Priority 4

As stated in paragraph 8, there is a clear and valid interrelationship 
between disaster and national development and, in particular, each 
can affect the other. Also, a post-disaster period usually offers the 
opportunity to enhance aspects of national development.

• Mitigation – Option Priority 5

If it is accepted, as inferred in the deﬁnition contained in paragraph 10 
that not all disaster effects may be prevented, but that these effects 
can be mitigated, then mitigation logically becomes the next option. 
Its particular advantage, in terms of national policy, is that it offers 
the possibility of reducing damage and loss, thus easing the burden 
on the government and the nation.

• Prevention – Option Priority 6

As inferred at the beginning of this paragraph, adopting programs 
of prevention may be problematical. In some cases, because of cost, 
they may have to be omitted or delayed. In other cases, they may be 
mandatory to protect a speciﬁc vital interest. The option priority is 

National Disaster Management Policy 

31

therefore best decided on an individual national basis. Thus, it may 
assist national policy makers to use the combined category heading 
of prevention/mitigation.

12. A Possible Policy Format

In summarizing what has been said concerning the main elements of 
national policy, a possible policy is given on the following page. However, 
the method by which the policy is issued is a matter for individual national 
choice. For instance, it might be issued by:

• government decree,
• government statement,
• 
• 
• other means.

legislation,
regulation, and

Arrangements for Monitoring and Review

13. The policy statement itself should designate responsibility for monitoring 
and reviewing the national policy statement. Usually, it is appropriate to allocate 
this responsibility to the responsible minister (or ministerial body), who could 
normally be expected to delegate it to the senior disaster management body 
(e.g., NDC).

14. 
Post-disaster review (Chapter 20) will often provide a good indication 
of whether existing national policy is valid, or whether it should be reviewed 
and amended.

32 

Disaster Management

SUGGESTED STATEMENT OF NATIONAL 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT POLICY

Introduction

Including summary of the disaster threat

Purpose of the Policy Statement

 The purpose of this statement is to define the national policy for 
dealing with the disaster threat to Exland

or

 The purpose of this statement is to define the national policy for 
disaster management necessary to counter the disaster threat 
to Exland.

The Overall National Aim

 The overall national aim regarding disaster management is to 
establish and maintain the optimum system for dealing with 
disaster which is achievable within national resources.

Responsibilities for Disaster Management

at national level (e.g., ministerial responsibility, departmental 

responsibilities)

at other levels

Main Elements of Disaster Management

Prevention,
Mitigation,
Preparedness (with definitions),
Response,
Recovery, and
Development

Priorities Accorded to Main Elements

National Disaster Management Policy 

33

Planning

National Disaster Plan 
Other Plans

Organization

Use of existing government structure
Arrangements for augmenting government structure (e.g., NDC)

Important Disaster Management Concepts

Optimum coordination and use of resources
Community involvement and awareness to develop preparedness 

and self-reliance.

Legislation

Special disaster legislation
Other emergency powers

Relationship with other National Policies

National development, 
Protection of environment, and
Others

Other Sections as Required

e.g., financial arrangements

Viability of National Policy

Responsibility for monitoring and review

Government Authorization

This policy is issued under Government Decree (or Cabinet
decision) No., dated

Chapter 4

Major Requirements 
for Coping with Disaster

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the major requirements for 

1. 
coping with disaster, especially in terms of:

• organization,
• planning,
• use of resources,
• 
• 

specialist skills, and
training needs.

The chapter is intended to provide a preliminary ready reference to major 
areas of disaster management, especially for persons who may be initially 
assuming duties in this ﬁeld. These areas are expounded in later chapters and 
cross-reference to these chapters has been made.

Scope of Disaster-Related Action

In assessing the scale of organizational, planning, and other measures 
2. 
which need to be undertaken to deal with disaster, it is useful to bear in mind 
the range of responsibilities and tasks that are likely to arise. For instance:

• providing and disseminating warning;
• 
• 
• 
• 

search and rescue;
surveying, assessing, and reporting disaster effects;
treating and caring of victims;
 clearing debris and rehabilitating roads, airﬁelds, railway systems, 
ports, and other key areas;

• providing emergency food and water supplies;
• providing shelter;
• evacuating individuals, groups, and communities, and livestock;

36 

Disaster Management

• providing health and sanitation measures;
• 

 restoring essential services such as communications, water and 
power supply;

• directing and coordinating counter-disaster measures;
• 
informing and advising the public;
• ﬁnancially assisting victims immediately;
• maintaining public morale;
• counseling victims and relatives;
• controlling and distributing emergency supplies;
• 
• 

liaising with the media;
 rehabilitating crops, production, and other aspects of subsistence 
and livelihood;

• emergency building programs;
• measures for long-term recovery; and
• applying emergency regulations.

3. 
The scope and variety of these tasks underline the need for a carefully 
organized and systematic approach to all aspects of disaster management. Ad 
hoc measures, even if based on long experience and traditional action, are likely 
inadequate, although obviously they can make a useful contribution.

The Philosophy for Coping with Disaster

4. 
Before the requirements for coping with disaster can be determined and 
adequately met, it is essential to bear in mind the simple but nonetheless important 
philosophy which is involved. This is that disaster can have wide-ranging effects 
on a country, its government, and its people. Therefore, the primary responsibility 
for coping with disaster must rest with government. Government is responsible 
to the people for meeting the needs created by disaster, in the same way that it 
is responsible for other aspects of national life. However, a government may, and 
usually does, need help from NGOs, the private sector, general public and, in 
many cases, from its international development partners also.

5. 
This being so, it is government organization and resources that necessarily 
have to bear the brunt of counter-disaster action. Further, when government 
departments and agencies (including emergency services) have to deal with 
disaster, they invariably have to accept a considerable additional workload.
Moreover, they usually have to function under pressure and in cooperation with 
a variety of other agencies (government or otherwise). A further point is that 
disaster produces some needs that may not be covered by normal government 
organization such as mass feeding.

Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

37

6. 
This is why, in essence, a disaster management system is needed. But
—and this is important—the disaster management system does not control 
other government departments; it does not tell those departments how to 
do their jobs. The main function of the disaster management system is to 
ensure that at all times, and as far as possible, the resources and operations of 
these government departments and, as appropriate, NGOs are coordinated to 
produce the best possible counter-disaster effort.

7. 
In sum, therefore, the simple philosophy for coping with disaster is 
one of government and people working together in a coordinated way via a 
coherent disaster management system. The remainder of this chapter should 
be considered against this background.

Foundation Factors

8. 
Before the major requirements for coping with disaster can be established, 
it is essential that certain basic or foundation factors should be effectively 
covered. These include:

• an understanding of the signiﬁcance of disaster, especially at key 

levels throughout the government structure;
• a clear assessment of the disaster threat; and
• an effective disaster management policy.

9. 
These factors have been considered in Chapters 1–3. However, their 
overall importance is reemphasized here because they are fundamental to the 
requirements of organization, planning, resource utilization, and training which 
are discussed in the remainder of this chapter.

Organization

10. 
Some people have difﬁculty in understanding what exactly comprises 
a disaster management organization or system. It may be useful, therefore, to 
state some things that such an organization does not do.

• 
• 
• 
• 

It does not duplicate normal government organization.
It does not act independently of government.
It does not control other government departments.
 It does not act outside the charter or terms of reference given to it 
by government, except perhaps in cases of extreme urgency.

38 

Disaster Management

These things being so—and they apply in most countries—it becomes clear 
that when we talk about disaster management organization, or counter-disaster 
organization, we are really talking about an organizational system. Moreover, 
this is a system which is essentially an adjunct to the normal government 
system, designed to enable the latter to deal effectively with the special 
demands which may arise from disaster. The extent of these demands is well 
illustrated by paragraph 2.

11. Consideration of a simple example helps illustrate the various foregoing 
points. In the following diagram, for ease of illustration, it has been assumed 
that national policy—perhaps for ﬁnancial reason—has been conﬁned 
primarily to preparedness, response, and recovery. However, if other aspects 
had been included, they could easily be incorporated into the system shown. 
It is emphasized, of course, that the system illustrated is only one of several 
variations which could be used.

12. 

Important Organizational Considerations

A more detailed coverage of organizational aspects is contained in 
Chapter 11. That chapter provides details, for instance, of the composition of 
an operations control group (OCG), the functions, management, and stafﬁng 
of a national emergency operations center, and so on.

However, the following certain important organizational considerations 

are worth noting at this stage: 

• 

 The nature of the system
As emphasized in paragraph 10, the system is not some form 
of specialized setup superimposed on the existing government 
structure. On the contrary, it adapts existing resources for disaster 
purposes. For instance, an NDC would not be made up of special 
disaster management ofﬁcials. It would normally comprise senior 
government ofﬁcials (e.g., heads of departments) and representatives 
of NGOs because these people best understand and are responsible 
for the availability and utilization of resources in their respective 
spheres. They also understand the management factors and systems 
which apply within these two spheres. Obviously, members of the 
NDC would be required to have knowledge of disaster management, 
acquired through training and experience.

Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

39

• The utilization of the total government structure

The system utilizes the total extent and depth of an existing 
government structure; that is, from a national level through 
provincial (or its equivalent) level, down to local government 
and community level. This government structure is, by its nature, 
permanent. It therefore makes sense to utilize it for all disaster-
related purposes. In any event, experience indicates that it is unwise 
to try to switch to some alternative system or structure purely to 
deal with disaster.

• 

 Coordination of nongovernment resources 
 Nongovernment resources can be easily coordinated into the system. 
This can be done, for instance, through the NDC—as already 
mentioned—through the NDMO (with which there can be an NGO 
liaison link) and through the OCG and the technical advisory team 
(both of which there can be NGO representation).

• Community involvement

Disasters happen at community level. They may affect several 
communities at one and the same time, but these communities that 
constitute what might be called the “disaster front.” Any disaster 
management organization must therefore cater to appropriate 
community involvement and participation. This applies particularly 
to relevant aspects of preparedness, response, and recovery action. 
In fact, in framing and/or checking organizational effectiveness, it 
is advisable to consider requirements at community level ﬁrst and 
then, subsequently, to tailor arrangements at higher levels so that 
these ﬁt requirements at the “disaster front.”

• Specialist facilities and systems

A disaster management organizational system is essentially a 
dynamic entity. All phases of the disaster management cycle infer 
and involve action. This obviously requires a range of specialist 
facilities and systems, usually needed to cover things such as:
- direction and coordination of disaster-related action;
- emergency operations center activities;
- 

 alerting and activating the disaster management system, as 
and when required;

- communications;
- warning;

40 

Disaster Management

Disaster Mangement System Organizational and 
Functional Diagram

CABINET

National Disaster . . . . . . . International
Assistance
 Council 

National Disaster
Management Office

PREPAREDNESS

RESPONSE

RECOVERY

Government
departments/
NGOs

Provincial
disaster
committees

Operations
Control Group

National Emergency 
Operations Center

Government
departments/NGOs

Technical
Advisory
Team

Government
departments/
NGOs

Provincial
disaster
committees

Provincial
disaster
committees

Local
government
committees

Local
government
committees

COMMUNITIES

DISASTER AREAS

RECOVERY PROGRAMS

survey and assessment;
information management; and

- 
- 
- emergency logistics.

In considering overall organizational requirements, therefore, it is essential to 
determine the range of specialist facilities and systems which will apply to any 
particular set of circumstances.

13. An Important Product

Clearly, a sound organizational system is one major key to successful 
disaster management. However, in considering and applying what has been 

 
Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

41

said in paragraphs 10–12 above, it should be noted that effective organization 
produces one particularly important product. This is what is sometimes called 
“operational coherency” during response operations. Operational coherency 
means that the disaster direction/coordination authority—and therefore 
the government—has a clear picture at all times of the needs caused by the 
disaster and the pattern of action being taken to cope with such needs. If 
operational coherency is lost—even for short periods—response operations 
can be adversely affected, sometimes very seriously.

14. Further Information on Organization

Further information on organizational aspects is contained in Chapter 11.

Planning

15. The Need for Counter-Disaster Plans

The need for counter-disaster plans is sometimes questioned. Proponents 
of this view take the attitude that disaster will occur whether we like it or 
not. Therefore, it is better to let nature take its course, then use all available 
means of assistance to build a better tomorrow. However, the vast majority 
of international experience indicates that where plans did not exist, or where 
planning was inadequate, then the effects of disaster on countries and their 
peoples have been worse than would have otherwise been the case. A senior 
disaster management ofﬁcial once wrote to the author of this handbook as 
follows: “When we look back on the cyclone and what it did to our country, 
there is no doubt that hundreds of people are alive here today because we had 
proper disaster plans.”

There can be little doubt that an effective basis of planning and the maintenance 
of relevant plans does offer the following advantages:

• clear and coherent approach to dealing with disaster;
• common reference for all departments and authorities which have 

roles in counter-disaster activity;

• basis for coordinated action;
• clear allocation of responsibilities;
• 
• 

focus for disaster-related training; and
setting against which to review and evaluate current and future 
disaster management requirements.

16. Pitfalls in Planning

There are, of course, pitfalls in the planning ﬁeld. Plans must be 
reviewed and revised as necessary so that they are fully updated. Indeed, it is 

42 

Disaster Management

true that an unrevised and outmoded plan may cause more trouble than no 
plan at all.

There is also a serious danger from nominalism in planning. Nominalism is 
often regarded as the deadly sin of a disaster manager. It is relatively easy—
given a speciﬁc set of circumstances—to produce a counter-disaster plan, put 
it in an attractive cover, and circulate it to all concerned. However, this can 
amount to little or nothing more than a useless front or facade. Because if 
the system which is necessary to implement the plan is not fully effective, 
then, quite simply, the plan will not work. In other words, if there is lack of 
necessary funding, personnel, equipment, facilities, systems, training support 
and so on, the plan becomes nominalistic; that is, a plan in name only. This 
has occurred in some countries, usually because of:

lack of a clear national policy,
• 
inadequate funding,
• 
• 
limited expertise, or
• other similar reasons.

So what is very much needed in planning is realism, not nominalism.

Another planning pitfall concerns what is often called “moving the goalposts.” 
This usually takes the form of major changes to government policy, structure, 
or organization. The result is that the plan no longer ﬁts the realities of the 
situation that must therefore be amended; otherwise, serious problems will 
arise. The sequence of events in a certain disaster-prone country illustrates 
this point.

Year X 

Year X + 1 

Year X + 3 

– 

– 

– 

Year X + 7 

– 

 The country was hit by a disaster, resulting in great 
damage, destruction, and loss. 
 The government, with help from the United 
Nations, produced a national disaster plan. 
 Another disaster struck the country, the plan was 
brought into action and the situation handled 
satisfactorily.
 The plan was subjected to post-disaster review and, 
apart from minor amendments, was conﬁrmed.
 A further disaster occurred and the plan was 
brought into action. This time, the plan did not 
work effectively.

Subsequently, it became clear that there were two major reasons for the 

apparently proven plan not working in year X + 7:

Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

43

 i. 

ii. 

 The plan had not been reviewed during the previous 4 years and, 
therefore, became stale.
 In the same 4-year period, a new government had made signiﬁcant 
changes to the government structure. Thus, the plan was no longer 
applicable to current circumstances.

17. Other Critical Areas in Planning

Several other areas of planning can prove critical when plans are 

implemented in response to a disaster event. They include the following:

• crisis pressure which arises from disaster impact;
• effect of disaster impact on the organizational structure;
• deﬁciencies in the information management system;
• 

inadequacy of planning for post-impact survey, assessment, and 
reporting;

• allocation of tasks to resource organizations; and
• coordination of counter-disaster effort.

These critical areas are covered in later chapters.

18. Further Information on Planning

Further information on counter-disaster plans, including planning 

guidelines, is contained in Chapter 12.

Use of Resources

19. One most difﬁcult problem in disaster management is to achieve the 
optimum use of available resources. Difﬁculties tend to arise for some or all of 
the following reasons:

• counter-disaster planning has been inadequate;
• all potential resources have not been identiﬁed during the planning 

• 

process;
resource organizations have not been accurately assessed in terms 
of their capability, availability, and durability;

• allocating tasks to resource organizations has been inaccurate or 

• 

• 

inappropriate;
resource organizations are not sufﬁciently skilled in carrying out 
allotted tasks;
some resources may be destroyed or put out of action by disaster 
impact;

44 

Disaster Management

• delays may occur in the availability and application of resources, 

• 

• 

• 

also due to disaster impact;
resource organizations have had insufﬁcient practice in their disaster 
roles, especially in coordinating their activities with those of other 
resource organizations;
system for directing the use of resource organizations, especially for 
 coordinating their activities, is inadequate;
inadequate and/or inaccurate information may lead to ineffective 
deployment and use of resources; and

• poor direction of resources may result in duplication or gaps in 

disaster-response activities.

20. An Important Management Proviso

The resources which are used to deal with disaster situations tend to be 

a mixture—sometimes a complex one—of:

• government departments and agencies (sometimes including 

military forces);

• NGOs;
• community individuals and groups; and
• 

international teams or volunteers.

During the planning process, it may not have been possible to accurately 
envisage the nature of some of these resources: for example, international 
volunteer teams. Therefore, the direction/coordination authority in charge of 
response operations may face problems in optimally utilizing all resources.

An important management proviso in all these circumstances is to correctly 
use the management systems within individual resource organizations. 
Certainly, the direction/coordination authority should, for example, tell a 
public works department what tasks need to be carried out such as for debris 
clearance, opening of roads, etc.) and what priorities should be given to these 
tasks. However, the direction/coordination authority should not try to tell 
public works how to carry out such tasks; this is essentially a matter for the 
department’s own management.

If this management proviso is strictly observed, then:

• 

• 

there will be no confusion between the management role of the 
direction/coordination authority and that of the resource organization;
there is unlikely to be conﬂict of management;

Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

45

tasks will be carried out accurately and efﬁciently; and

• 
• overall effectiveness of response operations will be maintained at 

optimum level.

21. 

Important Resource Management Needs

Given that the foregoing important proviso is recognized and applied, 
resource management—and thus effective utilization—depends largely on 
four major needs, as follows:

• a capable emergency operations center (EOC) system;
• a good information picture;
• effective communication between 

the direction/coordination 

• 

authority and individual resource organizations; and
sensible commitment of resource organizations to operational tasks, 
bearing in mind their capability and durability.

22. Further Information on Resources

Further information concerning resources and resource organizations 

is given in Chapter 8.

Specialist Skills

In paragraphs 4–21, various aspects of the following subjects have been 

23. 
covered:

the philosophy for coping with disaster,
foundation factors,

• 
• 
• organization,
• planning, and
• use of resources.

Throughout these aspects, a common theme is apparent. It is that in dealing 
with disaster, every effort needs to be made to extract maximum effectiveness 
from existing systems and resources.

24. However, the scope of disaster-related action shown in paragraph 2 
above indicates that a multiplicity of skills is necessary if disaster management 
is to be effective. While most of these skills are likely to exist within various 
organizations and the community, they may be insufﬁcient in strength and 
numbers to cope with disaster, especially on a large scale. This may particularly 
apply to the following:

46 

Disaster Management

search and rescue;
survey, assessment, and reporting;

• 
• 
• ﬁrst aid;
• mobile medical teams;
• evacuation;
• emergency welfare (e.g., mass feeding programs);
• emergency shelter (e.g., erection of tentage, emergency building 

repairs);

• emergency logistics;
• 
• 

stafﬁng of EOCs, including mobile ones; and
information management.

In this connection, the need for developing the leadership skills of team 
leaders/managers should be borne in mind.

25. 
It is suggested, therefore, that a broad assessment of specialist skills 
requirements should be made and compared against the number of skilled 
personnel available. In this way, the needs for training in specialist skills can 
be established broadly.

Training Needs

26. The Importance of Trained Personnel

Moving into the more general training ﬁeld, it is self-evident that trained 
personnel constitute a key component in effective disaster management. By 
contrast, unskilled and untrained disaster operatives can well be a menace to 
themselves and to other people, as the following examples indicate:

• Following an explosion in a building, the situation was made more 
difﬁcult and complex than it was originally by unskilled people 
attempting to save lives. There was no clearly identiﬁable search and 
rescue coordinator on-site and this—coupled with the unskilled 
effort—resulted in an unsystematic search and rescue pattern. For, 
instance, when some would-be rescuers moved planks, bricks, and 
other debris to one part of the rescue site, others almost immediately 
moved them back again. The resultant inefﬁciency of the total search 
and rescue effort was blatantly obvious.

• An unskilled person attempting to ﬁght a serious outbreak of ﬁre 
as part of a volunteer team, almost immediately became a casualty 
himself. Not realizing the ﬁre-prone nature of the synthetic clothing 
that he was wearing, he himself was set aﬁre. Thus, not only did the 

Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster 

47

volunteer team lose a valuable member, it also had a casualty who 
had to be given urgent ﬁrst-aid attention.

• A wrong decision—obviously based on lack of disaster management 
knowledge and skill—resulted in a large number of people being 
sheltered from a cyclone in buildings that were structurally inadequate. 
More than 40 people died when the buildings collapsed.

Unfortunately, many other similar examples serve as reminders of the dangers 
arising from inadequate knowledge and training.

27. Major Training Considerations

International experience indicates that important policy considerations 

need to be applied to disaster management training. They are as follows:

• Nations should identify their own training needs and frame their 
individual policies accordingly. To take examples from other 
countries or academic sources, and try to apply them as exact 
“blueprints,” is unlikely to prove satisfactory.

• Training programs must be designed to be compatible with and 

support disaster plans.

• Responsibility for training must be clearly deﬁned in national policy 

statements and counter-disaster plans.

28. Scope of Training Activity

One important ﬁrst step in establishing training policies and programs 
is to identify clearly the scope of training activity required. This is best done 
by closely examining the following:

• national disaster management policy;
• 
• all relevant plans including, for instance, those of individual 

the overall disaster management structure, through all levels;

• 

government departments and NGOs;
requirements for public education and awareness with which 
training programs need to be compatible; and

• other relevant sources of information (e.g., comparison with 

overseas training programs).

29. Training Policy

Once the scope of necessary training activity has been deﬁned, it should 
be translated into a training policy. This is best done in the form of a simple 
policy document that clearly sets out the following:

48 

Disaster Management

• major training consideration (see paragraph 27);
• aim of training policy;
• 
• 

responsibility for implementing a training policy;
scope of training to be carried out (e.g., disaster management areas 
to be covered and levels at which programs will be implemented;

• process for reviewing and updating training programs; and
• periodic issue (annually or otherwise) of training programs.

In framing and implementing a training policy, it must be borne in mind 
that training is a dynamic activity which is susceptible to changing requirements. 
For instance, in a given training program, the need for some activities will 
diminish, while the need for other activities will arise. Consequently, assessing 
the training pattern annually is usually worth carrying out so that programs are 
kept compatible with realistic training needs.

30. 

Implementation of Training

For most countries, it is appropriate to implement a twofold training, 

as follows:

• 

• 

 In-country t raining
This should essentially address domestic training needs in 
accordance with national policy and its selected programs. Such 
training should use in-country resources to the best possible extent. 
It should usually comprise a variety of activities such as seminars, 
workshops, courses, exercises, etc. (Chapter 21).

International training
International training is usually designed to broaden the knowledge 
of key disaster management ofﬁcials, mainly through the interchange 
of views, ideas, and experience which it provides. It should be 
regarded as an important adjunct to in-country training but not as 
a substitute for the latter. (Chapter 21).

31. Further Information on Training

The points covered in paragraphs 26–30 are intended to underline certain 
major training issues only. Further detailed information is given in Chapter 21.

Chapter 5

The Disaster Management Cycle

Purpose

1. 
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the main considerations 
concerning the cycle of events that applies to disaster management, including 
the following:

• disaster management cycle used in this handbook,
• composition of the main activities within the cycle, and
• application of the cycle to practical disaster management.

The Disaster Management Cycle

2. 
As stated in the introductory notes, the disaster management cycle can 
be, and often is, portrayed in various forms. Moreover, alternative terminology 
may be used. The important factor, however, is that the format should indicate 
that disaster and managing it is a continuum of interlinked activity. It is not a 
series of events which start and stop with each disaster occurrence.

3. 

Basic Format

The basic format of the disaster management cycle that is used in this 
handbook, and which is also shown in the introductory notes, is repeated here 
for ease of reference (ﬁgure 1).

4. 

Alternative Format

An alternative format, which is sometimes used, shows the main 

components in the form of activity segments, as shown in ﬁgure 2.

It will be noted that the outer segments of preparedness, response, and recovery, 
superimposed on ﬁgure 2, relate to similar segments in ﬁgure 1.

50 

Disaster Management

: Basic Format of the Disaster Management Cycle 

DISASTER
IMPACT

PREPAREDNESS

RESPONSE

MITIGATION

RECOVERY

PREVENTION

DEVELOPMENT

: Alternative Format of the Disaster Management Cycle 

RESPONSE

RECOVERY

T
C
A
P
M

I

THREAT

PREPAREDNESS

CY
EMERGEN
ASE
PH
RESTORATION

REVIEW

RECONSTRUCTION
 NATIO
DEVELOPMENT
NAL

WARNING
PREPAREDNESS
ATIO
MITIG

N

THE 
DISASTER
CYCLE

N
O
I
T
N
E
V
E
R
P

The Disaster Management Cycle 

51

The format in ﬁgure 2 can be utilized to make two signiﬁcant points:

 i. Such format is schematic only. It does not and cannot designate the 
length or relative importance of the component parts. For instance, 
the actual recovery period may vary considerably for different 
disasters. Or, in a particular set of circumstances, the amount of 
importance, priority, and effort allotted to prevention may be small 
when compared with that given to, say, preparedness.

ii. Such format should not be allowed to give the impression that 
each activity segment is clearly and precisely divided from 
adjacent ones. On the contrary, it is important to understand that 
segments generally tend to overlap and/or merge. For instance, 
some response activities may be initiated prior to disaster 
impact—that is, during the preparedness segment. Such activities 
might include the precautionary movement of threatened persons 
or communities to safe havens prior to the impact of a cyclone. 
Similarly, recovery action often begins while the emergency 
response period is still operative. For example, a technical 
advisory team would probably begin collecting information 
immediately after impact and such information would be used for 
both response and recovery purposes.

Points such as these are important when it comes to practical disaster 
management action. This aspect is referred to again in paragraphs 13 and 14.

Composition of Main Activities

5. 
The composition of the main segments within the disaster management 
cycle is described brieﬂy in paragraphs 6–12. In this connection, it is worth 
bearing in mind that two major factors are likely to trigger action in some 
or all of these segments. These factors may also affect the balance between 
activities and the priorities allotted to individual activities. The factors are:

• 

 Post-disaster r eview
 Post-disaster review should be carried out as early as practicable in the 
recovery period. Such review will often reveal deﬁciencies in plans and 
will also indicate, for example, if certain activities such as preparedness 
measures and response arrangements need strengthening.

• Results of exercise or simulations

Provided exercises and simulations are accurately evaluated and the 
lessons from them are correctly drawn, they can exert inﬂuences 

52 

Disaster Management

similar to those of post-disaster review. In some cases, exercises and 
simulations can be more effective because

- 

- 

 they can be directed toward testing a particular part within 
the disaster management cycle (e.g., coordination in the use of 
resources); and
 their lessons can be more accurately deﬁned than is sometimes 
the case with post-disaster review (because the latter may lack 
vital information which was overlooked or lost under the 
pressures of disaster impact).

Furthermore, effective day-to-day disaster management (for example, under 
an active NDC and NDMO) should monitor all aspects of activity and initiate 
necessary action accordingly.

6. 

Prevention (Chapter 14)

Action within this segment is designed to impede the occurrence 
of a disaster and/or prevent such an occurrence having harmful effects on 
communities or key installations. The following are usually classiﬁed as 
preventive measures:

• constructing a dam or levee to control ﬂoodwaters so that the latter 
cannot adversely affect people, buildings and other installations, 
livestock, means of production and subsistence, and so on;

• controlled burning off in a bushﬁre-prone area prior to the high 
ﬁre-risk season. This action can remove potential fuel and actually 
prevent the start of a ﬁre or, if it does start, prevent it from reaching 
threatening proportions; and
some forms of legislation can also be regarded as prevention (e.g., 
 land-use regulations which ensure that communities are not allowed 
to develop on vulnerable sites such as the disaster-prone areas of a 
ﬂood plain).

• 

It is noteworthy that some countries tend to use the term prevention/mitigation 
as a combined heading for action within these two segments.

7. Mitigation (Chapter 15)

Action within this segment usually takes the form of speciﬁc programs 
intended to reduce the effects of disaster on a nation or community. For instance, 
some countries regard the development and application of building codes that 

The Disaster Management Cycle 

53

can reduce damage and loss in the event of earthquakes and cyclones, as being 
in the category of mitigation. Other countries may regard such building codes 
as being in the category of prevention; recent developments in earthquake-
proof buildings have undoubtedly inﬂuenced this outlook.

The term mitigation more generally implies that while it may be possible to 
prevent some disaster effects, other effects will persist but can be modiﬁed or 
reduced provided appropriate action is taken.

The foregoing points suggest that, under some circumstances, the term 
prevention/mitigation may be more suitable for some countries than using 
prevention and mitigation as two separate concepts and activities.

The following actions or programs are generally regarded as coming under the 
heading of mitigation:

• enforcement of building codes;
• 
• 

land-use regulations;
safety regulations relating to high-rise building, control of hazardous 
substances, etc;
safety codes governing land, sea, and air transport systems;

• 
• agricultural programs aimed at reducing the effects of hazards on 

• 

crops;
systems to protect key installations such as power supplies and vital 
communications; and

• developments in infrastructure, such as the routing of new highways 

away from disaster-prone areas.

8. 

Preparedness (Chapter 16)

Preparedness is usually regarded as comprising measures which enable 
governments, organizations, communities, and individuals to respond rapidly 
and effectively to disaster situations. Examples of preparedness measures are:

• 

• 

formulating and maintaining valid and updated counter-disaster 
plans which can be brought into effect whenever required;
special provisions for emergency action, such as evacuating 
populations or moving them temporarily to safe havens;

• providing warning systems;
• emergency communications;
• public education and awareness; and
• 

training programs, including exercise and tests.

54 

Disaster Management

One aspect of preparedness that is not always prioritized adequately is 
individual and/or family preparedness. In many circumstances where 
government resources and emergency services are limited, such individual 
and family preparedness may be vital for survival.

Some disaster management cycles may divide the preparedness segment into 
subsegments such as:

• Warning – The time or period when a hazard has been identiﬁed 
but is not yet threatening a particular area (e.g., notiﬁcation that a 
cyclone exists but is far away).

• Threat – The time or period when a hazard has been identiﬁed and 
is assessed as threatening a particular area (e.g., a cyclone is tracking 
toward that area).

• Precaution – Action taken after receipt of warning to offset effects of 

disaster impact. Such action might include:
- closing ofﬁces, schools, etc.;
- bringing emergency power generators to readiness;
- cutting crops to avoid total loss from high winds and heavy rain;
- making safe boats and vehicles; and
- 

taking household precautions, such as storing emergency water 
supplies.

An advantage in including these subsegments is that it provides some indication 
of the possible sequence of events/action leading up to disaster impact.

9. Disaster Impact

This segment is self-explanatory, being the point in the disaster cycle 
at which a disaster occurs; for instance, when a cyclone strikes a country or 
a particular area. However, including it serves as a reminder that—in disaster 
management terms—impact can vary between different types of disaster. For 
instance:

• An earthquake may give no warning and its impact time can be 

short. Yet the result can be very severe indeed.

• A cyclone may provide a long warning period and its impact time 
(i.e., the time when it has destructive and damaging effects) can be 
protracted. This may be particularly so if the cyclone passes directly 
over a given area, or backtracks as may sometimes occur.

The Disaster Management Cycle 

55

10. Response (Chapter 17)

Response measures are usually those which are taken immediately 
prior to and following disaster impact. However, for ease of representation, 
the response segment is shown (ﬁgure 2) as following directly after disaster 
impact; and this is when most response measures are applied.

Such measures are mainly directed toward saving life and protecting property, 
and to dealing with the immediate disruption, damage, and other effects 
caused by the disaster. Typical measures include:

search and rescue;

implementing plans;

• 
• activating the counter-disaster system;
• 
• providing emergency food, shelter, medical assistance, etc.;
• 
• evacuating.

surveying and assessing; and

The segment is sometimes called emergency response to indicate that it applies 
to a fairly short period (i.e., the 2–3 weeks after impact) when emergency 
measures are necessary to deal with the immediate effects of a disaster and 
when, perhaps, a state of emergency or state of disaster may have been declared 
by government.

It may be noteworthy here that it is sometimes said that all disaster-related 
activities that follow impact (including measures of relief, rehabilitation, 
restoration, and reconstruction) constitutes response. However, for a 
user handbook, it is more convenient and practicable to divide response 
from recovery.

11. Recovery (Chapter 19)

Recovery is the process by which communities and the nation are assisted in 
returning to their proper level of functioning following a disaster. The recovery 
process can be very protracted, taking 5–10 years, or even more. Three main 
categories of activity are normally regarded as coming within the recovery 
segment. These are:

• 
• 
• 

restoration,
rehabilitation, and
reconstruction.

56 

Disaster Management

Typical activities include:

restoring essential services;
restoring of repairable homes and other buildings/installations;

• 
• 
• providing temporary housing;
• measures to assist the physical and psychological rehabilitation of 

• 

persons who have suffered from the effects of disaster; and
long-term measures of reconstruction, including the replacement 
of buildings and infrastructure that have been destroyed by 
the disaster.

Post-disaster review should also be included as part of the recovery process. It 
should take place as soon as practicable after the disaster.

12. Development (Chapter 6)

The development segment provides the link between disaster-related 
activities and national development. Its inclusion in the disaster cycle is 
intended to ensure that the results of disaster are effectively reﬂected in future 
policies in the interests of national progress. For instance, to produce the best 
possible beneﬁts by:

• 

introducing improved and modernized building systems and 
programs;

• using international disaster assistance to optimum effect;
• applying disaster experience in future research and development 

programs; and

• using any other means appropriate to a particular situation.

At the same time, this linkage should be used to ensure that national 
development does not create further disaster problems, or exacerbate existing 
ones. This point is developed further in Chapter 6.

Application to Practical Disaster Management

It is suggested that individual countries should choose the form of 

13. 
disaster management cycle which is most appropriate to their needs.

14. Apart from its obvious value in providing a “visual aid” for those 
involved in the study of disaster and in disaster management, the disaster 
cycle can have various practical applications. For instance, in:

The Disaster Management Cycle 

57

• Training programs

These programs tend to concentrate mainly on the various aspects 
of preparedness, response, and recovery. Use of the disaster 
management cycle helps facilitate understanding of not only the 
important relationship between these three vital aspects but also 
their connection with other disaster-related activities. The cycle can 
also have other training applications. For example, it can be used 
during exercise brieﬁngs to illustrate the precise point, within the 
total disaster management process, at which an exercise is set.

• Programs of public education and awareness

For these programs, the cycle can be used in much the same way as 
for training programs. It could be especially useful for:
- disaster education in schools, and
- heightening public awareness (through posters or television 
programs) prior to high-risk seasons, such as a cyclone or
ﬂood season.

• 

 Day-to-day disaster management activities
The cycle could be an effective reference and calendar against 
which to check the progress of disaster management at various 
levels of government; for instance, developing plans, progress in 
preparedness measures, review by the NDC, and so on.

• Maintaining government impetus behind disaster management

The cycle could be an effective tool during periodic brieﬁngs 
for cabinet and/or those ministers with key responsibilities for 
disaster management, especially to show where deﬁciencies need 
to be remedied.

Chapter 6

Disaster and 
National Development

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the main factors which apply 

1. 
to the interrelationship between disaster and national development.

2. 

The chapter considers:

• disaster and the national image;
• 
the impact of disaster on national development; and
• national development and disaster management policy.

Disaster and the National Image

In the modern world, countries are becoming increasingly interrelated 

3. 
and interdependent.

There are many reasons for this, and they include the following:

• world economic framework,
• need to conserve natural resources,
• need to protect the environment, and
• 

importance of avoiding world conﬂict with weapons of mass 
destruction.

Thus, a nation’s policies are thrown into sharp relief whenever it becomes 
involved in major international or national crises. Disaster is one national crisis 
and it can raise many issues and perceptions that reﬂect on a nation’s image.

60 

Disaster Management

4. 

International Aspects

When a country is struck by disaster, there is usually widespread 
international reaction to offer help. This certainly applies when the stricken 
country is in the developing category and, therefore, has limited capability 
for response and recovery. It becomes particularly and understandably 
emphasized when the country is markedly disaster-prone, as with Bangladesh 
and the Philippines. However, even large and powerful nations may attract 
international attention and help, as attested to by major earthquake problems 
in the former Soviet Union in 1988.

There can, however, be damaging consequences from disaster where a nation’s 
international image is concerned. This can apply even despite humanitarian 
sympathy and willingness to help. Some salient points, based on case studies, 
are given below.

• 

International donor countries and organizations have, over many 
years, provided help to developing countries to help the latter cope 
with disaster. This assistance has included:

– 

regional seminars and workshops aimed at enhancing disaster 
management knowledge and encouraging the development of 
 counter-disaster capability;

– providing funding and expertise for the formulation of plans;
– providing key systems and facilities such as emergency 
communications, emergency operations centers, and warning 
networks; and

– providing training for key ofﬁcials and others.

In some cases, recipient countries have made good use of this 
international assistance and have strengthened their counter-
disaster capabilities accordingly. Other recipient countries have 
not been able to avail of such assistance successfully. In these 
latter cases, there may have been valid reasons why international 
assistance could not be fully used. However, this is often lost from 
sight and the nations concerned may be dubbed as incompetent 
and not deserving of further assistance.

• 

In response operations, similar circumstances may arise. A stricken 
country which is well prepared for disaster usually has a good 
idea of what its immediate post-impact assistance needs will be. 
This especially applies to key commodities such as food, clothing, 
shelter materials, medical assistance, and emergency equipment. 

Disaster and National Development 

61

Requests to international assistance sources are, therefore, likely 
to be reasonably accurate and economical. The task of funding 
agencies is simpliﬁed accordingly.

However, in the case of an ill-prepared nation, difﬁculties are likely to 
arise in deﬁning what type and scale of international assistance is required. 
Misunderstandings and irritations may then arise between the recipient nation 
and the funding agencies, and these may well have a subsequent adverse effect 
on the nation’s international standing and image.

• 

It is notoriously difﬁcult to deﬁne the exact shape and size of post-
disaster recovery programs. This is due to many factors, including:

inadequate information from survey and assessment;

– 
– pressures of post-disaster problems, such as urgent rehousing 

needs;

– difﬁculties in deciding what priorities have to be given to the 

various individual recovery programs;

– sensitivities in international dealings with development partners; 

and

– post-disaster disruption to the government system of the 

stricken country.

Often, the stricken country feels pressured into making hasty deci- 
sions and commitments, which subsequently lead to misun-
derstandings and difﬁculties. The stricken nation may therefore 
appear in a less than competent light to its helper counterparts.

Factors such as these do not merely tarnish a country’s image. They 
can also have repercussions on national development generally because they 
may engender a reluctance from the international community to provide help 
in the case of vital, nondisaster development programs. In other words, if 
a nation cannot effectively use disaster-related assistance, why should it be 
expected to optimize other assistance forms ?

However, it is not only the less powerful nations whose images may 
suffer from disaster-related affairs. A large nation can have problems, too. For 
instance, pollution of waterways, oceans, or the atmosphere that is generated 
by industrial and other activities of a large nation, may affect lesser neighbors. 
The Chernobyl nuclear disaster is a case in point.

In brief, therefore, disaster-related events and activities can have a variety of 
international effects, some of which may adversely reﬂect on future development.

62 

Disaster Management

5. National Aspects

From an internal viewpoint, disaster can and often does affect a nation’s 
standing, image, and stability. Understandably, a government comes under 
heavy pressure when disaster strikes. Thus, government is very much in the 
spotlight where the population is concerned. A bungling performance by 
government, especially where it affects the basic needs of the people, will 
usually result in some form of political backlash. A hungry, uncomfortable, and 
dispirited public is unlikely to be tolerant and forgiving toward incompetent 
leadership; thus, political leaders have been known to fall when post-disaster 
reckoning was made.

6. 
A combination of the international and national effects that arise from 
disaster can, therefore, be damaging to a nation’s prestige and status, and even 
its future.

The Impact of Disaster on National Development

7. 

Effects on Contemporary Development

It goes almost without saying that disaster can have very serious effects 
on the contemporary development of a nation. This is especially so in revenue-
producing areas and infrastructure. Typical examples include:

• Crops which have been developed over a number of years to produce 
an export capability may be destroyed or seriously damaged; for 
instance, the organized growth of coconut and oil palms as a source 
of copra and palm oil. Such destruction or damage can result in loss 
of development capital, destruction of production sources (e.g., the 
trees themselves), loss of processing facilities and equipment, loss 
of employee housing, and so on.

• Loss of livestock, through an outbreak of animal disease or rural 
wildﬁre, can devastate valuable national resources such as meat or 
wool trades.

• Land inundated by a cyclonic storm surge or tsunami can bring 
about salinization with severe consequences to both domestic and 
export food sources. Similarly, drought may cause severe restrictions 
on wheat growing, with consequent damage to or loss of a valuable 
export market.
In the case of infrastructure, losses from disaster can be crippling 
for ongoing national programs. For instance:

• 

Disaster and National Development 

63

– Damage to harbors and wharves can drastically limit maritime 
transport capability, thus, restricting export and import activity.
– Loss of aircraft and airport facilities may pose serious constraints 
similar to those which apply to the maritime aspects mentioned 
above.

– Loss of roads and bridges may curb important ongoing construction 

and other programs.

– Loss of buildings and facilities can seriously hamper the conduct 
of business and commerce, domestically and internationally.

The overall effect of disaster on contemporary progress and development may, 
therefore, be one which halts a nation in its tracks. This could be compared 
with the effects of a heart attack, in that it takes some time before the patient 
can resume business as usual.

8. 

Effects on Long-Term Development

The aforementioned contemporary effects can obviously be crippling 
for ongoing programs. However, some long-term consequences may be equally 
bad, or even worse. As a simple example, damaged coconut palms may take 
7–8 years to rehabilitate. By this time, a valuable export capability may have 
become outdated, or lost to other countries. Also, some of the wider economic, 
social and other effects may bear heavily on long-term development.

One major general fact against which long-term effects should be judged is 
that when disaster strikes, it deprives a nation of many of its current vital 
resources. These resources have to be renewed or rehabilitated before even 
moderate development can continue. Some resources are listed below and 
they come, by way of example, from an ongoing disaster when this chapter 
was being written (February 1990):

• communications,
• power supplies,
• housing,
roads,
• 
• water supplies,
• crops and other food sources,
• airport facilities,
• 
• 
• medical and health facilities.

shipping,
schools, and

64 

Disaster Management

The national effort and cost required to make good this kind of loss in resources 
must obviously detract from what is available for long-term development. So, 
the ﬁrst effect on long-term programs which arises from disaster impact is the 
economic and material loss, which is likely to cause delays in commencing 
and/or continuing such programs.

A second major effect may be on the development planning process. Most 
countries nowadays work to planned periods of development, such as a 
series of 5-year national development plans. Disaster can seriously upset this 
sequence of planning and implementation, possibly as follows:

• 
• 

• 

It may disrupt the current plan.
It may make it difﬁcult to forecast development progress, and to predict 
the likely status at the end of the ongoing plan. These factors will then 
create problems in determining the start-up parameters for the next 
planning period. (The effect of this aspect will obviously depend on 
the point within the ongoing plan at which disaster strikes).
It may raise problems in formulating the scope and content of the 
next (or follow-on) national development plan because the post-
disaster recovery process is difﬁcult to deﬁne accurately. In other 
words, unanticipated delays in recovery may dictate that resources 
have to be deﬂected from planned development.

These factors and others that may apply to individual cases, may cause 
difﬁculties in the areas of:

forecasting,
• 
• budgeting,
• planning progress, and
• 

implementing a program.

Thus, they upset the rhythm of national development and threaten its 
satisfactory achievement.

A third effect on national development may emanate from limitations which 
apply to normal international assistance programs. For instance, bilateral 
assistance programs usually have mutually agreed limitations on scope, 
size, time, and cost. Thus, a funding nation may agree to undertake a 3-year 
program of medical and health assistance. If a signiﬁcant disaster strikes at, 
say, the halfway stage of such a program, there will be obvious loss factors. 
In addition to this, however, the funding agency may well—in the interests 
of good relations—feel compelled to inject emergency assistance to deal with 

Disaster and National Development 

65

the disaster situation itself. This combination of loss and extra (unanticipated) 
help means that the overall cost of the program to the funding agency may 
have escalated considerably. The result is that the funding agency may have no 
option but to spread the program over a further year, or even more. Enforced 
adjustments of this nature can often arise. With nondisaster assistance programs 
generally, it is often common practice that any extra costs incurred by disaster 
are offset in future segments of such programs. Thus, national development 
overall can suffer from various forms of restriction.

A fourth effect is the reaction of development partners to the setbacks caused 
by disaster. The representative of a development partner once said to the 
writer of this handbook, “The havoc caused by this disaster has been really 
disappointing for us. After 6 years of running our assistance program, we were 
just beginning to see productive results. Now, about 70 % of our input has 
literally disappeared. In other words, we have put in 4 years effort for nothing, 
and now we have to do that 4 years work all over again.”

It is not suggested that this kind of setback discourages development partners 
from continuing their assistance programs. But it does mean that they 
occasionally suffer heavy losses themselves. This, in turn, may reduce their 
ability to implement programs, at least in the short term.

Various other factors arising from disaster may also affect long-term 
development. They include:

• 

long-term unsuitability of land areas (e.g., as a result of drought or 
other causes); and

• enforced relocation of communities.

There is also an important underlying national factor; that is, the loss, damage, 
and disruption caused by disaster can signiﬁcantly affect a nation’s capacity to 
absorb subsequent assistance programs, at least temporarily. Assistance inputs 
can then have an unsatisfactory forced-feeding effect which, far from helping 
development, can actually slow it down.

9. 
Before leaving the impact of disaster on national development, it is a 
sad reﬂection that countries most in need of development assistance tend to 
suffer most in terms of setbacks. Stronger nations, having more resources and 
therefore greater resilience, can cope with the impact on development more 
successfully than their weaker counterparts.

66 

Disaster Management

National Development and 
Disaster Management Policy

10. 
It is clear from paragraphs 3–9 that disaster can have far-reaching 
repercussions on a nation’s image. It can also pose serious restrictions on 
national development. It follows, therefore, that there needs to be a prudent 
connection between development and disaster management policy. However, 
this connection does not usually come about automatically. In this regard, 
there are two important interrelated points.

First, most major departments within government have a tangible and 
11. 
practical connection with disaster management. They have clearly deﬁned roles 
and responsibilities throughout the total process of prevention, mitigation, 
preparedness, response, and recovery (especially in these last three segments). 
These roles and responsibilities are formally laid down in the relevant counter-
disaster plans.

12. 
Second, those government departments primarily concerned with 
development planning do not usually have direct and practical connections 
with disaster management. These planning departments and sections would 
certainly be involved in actions affecting recovery and—perhaps to some 
lesser extent—with prevention and mitigation. But, generally speaking, they 
do not have the active day-to-day association with disaster management which 
ensures a clear and strong working relationship.

13. These two factors suggest, therefore, that some kind of bridging or 
linking mechanism is required between national development and disaster 
management.

14. There are, however, some important prerequisites to an effective linking 
of disaster management activities with those of national development. In most 
cases, from the disaster management side, these are likely to include:

• The need for the government to recognize clearly, at the highest 
level, the repercussions which disaster can have on the nation 
generally and on national development in particular. (If this 
recognition does not exist, or is not readily forthcoming, then it 
is obviously up to those who have the responsibility for dealing 
with disaster to promote such recognition by whatever means are 
feasible. This needs to be done realistically, not in an exaggerated 
form; otherwise, it will not achieve credibility).

• The need for a clear deﬁnition of disaster management policy,

Disaster and National Development 

67

• Clearly allocating disaster management responsibility at ministerial 

level.

• Establishing and maintaining an effective disaster management 

capability.

• A national disaster management ofﬁce or section capable of 
maintaining a sound day-to-day liaison with other government 
departments and agencies.

Obviously, it is assumed that similar prerequisites must exist from the national 
development side. Also, that a meaningful working relationship applies 
throughout the ministerial and departmental processes of government.

15. Possible Linking Arrangements

In most countries, the ministerial portfolios involving national 

development and disaster management are those covering:

the economy, 

• national development, 
• 
• ﬁnance,
• 
• disaster management (which, in practice, may be included in 
portfolios such as police and emergency services, home affairs, 
community services, defense force, etc.)

the environment, and

sometimes combined

Given that the appropriate portfolios are identiﬁed and earmarked, the choice 
of a linking system or arrangement becomes one of national option. One 
choice considered by a small nation is shown as option A.

In option A, action at provincial government level is processed through the 
governor and his staff, as for other affairs of government.

A second option, shown as option B, is schematic, based on the structure used 
in a developing country which is geographically much larger than the example 
used in option A.

16. The organizational options shown are, of course, for illustrative purposes 
only. In individual countries, many different factors bear on the relationship 
between national development and disaster management policy. These factors 
need to be taken into account when organizational arrangements are made.

68 

Disaster Management

Option A

NATIONAL DISASTER COUNCIL
(CABINET)

MINISTER-IN-CHARGE
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
AND DISASTER AFFAIRS

NATIONAL DISASTER
ADVISORY COMMITTEE

DIRECTOR
CENTRAL
PLANNING

Planning
Staff

DIRECTOR
DISASTER
AFFAIRS

Coordinator
Disaster
Preparedness

Central
Operations
Staff

Coordinator
Disaster
Relief and
Reconstruction

(Function
covering
preparedness,
mitigation, and
prevention)

(Function
covering
response)

(Function
covering
recovery)

Option B

SECRETARIAT

National
Emergency
Operations
Center (EOC)

:
:
:
Provincial
EOCs
:
:
:
Municipal
EOCs

Disaster and National Development 

69

NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT

NATIONAL DISASTER
COORDINATING
COMMITTEE
(Ministerial Level)

INTERDEPARTMENTAL
ADVISORY GROUP

Senior Official Level)

SPECIAL TASK FORCES

PROVINCIAL
DISASTER COORDINATING
COMMITTEES

MUNICIPAL
DISASTER COORDINATING
COMMITTEES

VILLAGE TASK
FORCE TEAMS

Explanatory Notes on Option B

1. This disaster management structure is directly related to and functions in line with the ongoing 
5-year national development plan.

2. The national disaster coordinating committee consists of senior ministers, all of whom have 
direct disaster management responsibilities. The committee is empowered to coopt other ministers, 
as required, to deal with special issues.

3. The interdepartmental advisory group, consisting of senior government officials, is required 
to monitor and advise on all disaster-related matters, including those which affect the relationship 
between disaster and national development. The goup is empowered to set up special task forces, 
as required.

4. Provincial disaster coordinating committees and municipal disaster coordinating committees 
have membership which is functionally in line with the national disaster coordinating committee.

5. An important factor is that the governor of the province is chairperson of the provincial 
disaster coordinating committee and he has a wide range of responsibilities at his level, including 
development.

Chapter 7

Disaster Legislation

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline major factors which apply to 

1. 
disaster legislation. The chapter covers the following:

• need for and value of legislation;
• main areas covered by legislation, using a ﬁrst draft as an 

illustration; and

• examples of existing legislation.

Acknowledgment for Use
of Existing Legislation

The chapter quotes existing legislation of the Cook Islands, Papua New 

2. 
Guinea, and the State of Queensland in Australia.

Thanks are expressed to these governments for permitting their 

3. 
legislation to be included in this handbook.

The Need for and Value of Legislation

4. 
Chapters 1–6 of this handbook cover only some limited aspects of disaster 
management. However, they are sufﬁcient to illustrate the wide repercussions 
which disaster can have, both nationally and internationally. For instance, a 
random sample taken from the aforementioned chapters indicates that disaster 
may cause:

the fall of governments because of inadequacies in disaster management;

• 
• national loss and damage on a crippling scale;
• problems with international assistance programs;
• delays in national development;
• 
• widespread destruction of and damage to the environment.

severe human trauma, hardship, and suffering; and

72 

Disaster Management

5. 
A large proportion of disaster-related matters are outside the normal 
pattern of life. While many, such can be predicted with reasonable accuracy 
(e.g., the effects of a particular type of disaster), others may be unforeseen. 
To deal effectively with disaster, therefore, requires a carefully calculated and 
accurate approach, culminating in a series of countermeasures which involve the 
government, nongovernment agencies, private sector, and the general public. 
Seen in this combined and concerted light, counter-disaster action would 
certainly seem to beneﬁt from an appropriate form of legal backing. In fact, 
there are very many instances on record where the lack of disaster legislation 
caused problems and difﬁculties. Conversely, no cases are known where the 
existence of such legislation proved to be a hindrance or constraint.

6. 

Some of the values of legislation are as follows:

• Legislation provides a formal basis for counter-disaster action 
generally. In other words, it formally supports plans, organizational 
arrangements, preparedness measures, response action, and so on.
• Legislation allocates major responsibilities in legal form. This helps 
ensure that such responsibilities will be properly implemented.
• Legislation can be made to have a uniform national effect, thus 
ensuring that all levels of the national counter-disaster structure 
receive the full beneﬁt of its support.

• Disaster legislation does not need to be complicated to be effective. 
It provides commonsense backing for commonsense requirements.

• Legislation provides a wide measure of protection for:

– governments that are usually charged with the responsibility for 
safeguarding the nation and its citizens, as far as possible, from 
the effects of disaster;

– organizations and individuals who are required to carry out 

 counter-disaster activities; and

– organizations and individuals who may be affected in various 

ways by disaster.

• Disaster legislation does not have to conﬂict with other legislation, 

such as emergency powers.

Main Areas Covered by Legislation

7. 
Disaster legislation can vary according to differing requirements 
and national systems. However, certain main areas are common to most 
circumstances, as will be evident from the factual examples quoted later in 
this chapter.

Disaster Legislation 

73

8. 
At the same time, a common factor in producing legislation is some 
initial difﬁculty in deciding exactly what is to be covered. A useful approach, 
therefore, is for disaster management ofﬁcials to deﬁne this coverage in the 
ﬁrst instance and then for legal ofﬁcials to convert it into legal form.

9. 
Below is an example of the initial draft of a national disaster act, as 
produced by disaster management ofﬁcials. This is, of course, only one way of 
presenting such a draft. Its purpose is to provide a general guide only.

Sample Draft of a National Disaster Act

DRAFT

First Revision 
10 Nov 1998

GOVERNMENT OF EXLAND 
NATIONAL DISASTER ACT 1999

PART 1 – PRELIMINARY 

Purpose

1. The purpose of this Act is to provide for the organization 
and management which is necessary to ensure mitigation of, 
preparedness for, response to, and recovery from disasters.

Commencement

2. This Act comes into force when approved by Parliament.

Definitions

3. 

In this Act, the following definitions apply:

“Agency” means a government agency or a nongovernment agency. 
“Disaster” means the actual or imminent occurrence of an event 
which endangers or threatens to endanger the safety or health of any 
communities or persons in Exland. or which destroys, or damages, or 
threatens to destroy or damage any property in Exland, arising from:

 
 
74 

Disaster Management

(i) cyclone;
(ii) flood;
(iii) tsunami;
(iv) earthquake;
(v) volcanic eruption;
(vi) drought;
(vii) air disaster;
(viii) maritime disaster;
(ix) major civil accident (such as a major fire, bushfire, or 

explosion);

(x) plague or epidemic; and
(xi) any other similar natural or man-made event, except 

those detailed in paragraphs 4 and 5.

“Government agency” means:

(i) 

 any body constituted by or under any Act for a public 
purpose;

(ii) any member or officer of such a body; and
(iii) 

 any person in the service of the Government of Exland 
upon whom any function, power, duty, or responsibility 
is conferred by or under any Act.

 “Minister responsible” means the minister appointed by the 
council of ministers to be responsible to that council for all 
 disaster-related matters.

 “National disaster plan” means the plan formulated and revised 
from time to time, as necessary, which defines the action to be 
taken to deal with disasters in Exland.

Etc.

 [Handbook Note: This list of definitions needs to be carefully 
defined from a disaster management viewpoint so that all 
possibility of doubt, misunderstanding, or misinterpretation is 
avoided.]

Limitations

4. This Act does not authorize the taking of measures to control 
civil disorders or to bring to an end an industrial dispute.

 
Disaster Legislation 

75

5. 

 This Act does not cover circumstances arising from combat 
against an enemy, unless specifically authorized by the council 
of ministers.

 [Handbook Note: Governments are usually careful about 
separating disaster circumstances from such matters as 
breaking of strike and war operations.]

PART 2 – ORGANIZATION

Minister Responsible

6. The council of ministers shall appoint a minister responsible to 
the council for all disaster-related matters applicable to this Act. In 
particular, the minister responsible is:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

 to ensure that adequate measures are taken by 
government agencies to mitigate, prepare for, and 
respond to disasters and to assist in the recovery from 
the effects of a disaster by persons or communities;
 to coordinate the activities of government agencies 
carrying out their statutory functions, powers, duties, and 
responsibilities in taking such measures; and
 to foster and facilitate the participation of nongovernment 
agencies in measures taken by the government for disaster 
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.

National Disaster Council

7. There is hereby established under this Act a body to be called 
the national disaster council to advise the minister responsible on 
all matters, including the coordination of activities of government 
and nongovernment agencies, relating to disaster mitigation, 
preparedness, response, and recovery.

8. The council will consist of:

(i) 

(ii) 

 a chairperson nominated by the minister responsible from 
within the minister’s department;

 a representative from each agency which the minister 
responsible considers should be so represented, to be 
nominated:

76 

Disaster Management

(a) 

(b) 

 in the case of a government agency, by the appropriate 
minister: and
in the case of a nongovernment agency, by the agency.

 [Handbook Note: Some countries prefer to nominate the 
holders of specific appointments as members of the national 
disaster council. However, the method shown above allows 
for considerable flexibility. Therefore, if changes to the council 
become necessary, there is no need to alter the Act.]

9. The national disaster council is to establish a central operations 
group to assist it during emergency operations carried out in 
response to a disaster. The role of this group is to ensure, on behalf 
of the council, that resources are allocated to operational tasks in 
the most effective way and in the correct priorities.

10. The procedures of the national disaster council are to be as 
determined by the chairperson.

National Disaster Management Office

11. There is also established under this Act a national disaster 
management office to carry out disaster management and other 
responsibilities as determined by the minister responsible and/or 
the national disaster council to advise the minister and the council, 
and to deal with routine disaster-related affairs at national level.

Local Government Disaster Committees

12. Under this Act, each local government council is required to 
establish a disaster committee.

Area Disaster Committees

13. Each area council is also required to establish a disaster 
committee. These area disaster committees are responsible for 
coordinating disaster-related measures in their own areas with 
those of local government disaster committees and the national 
disaster council.

Committees Established by the Minister Responsible

14. In addition to the organizational arrangements outlined in 
paragraphs 7–13, the minister responsible may establish such 

Disaster Legislation 

77

additional committees as are necessary to ensure comprehensive 
and integrated disaster management.

 [Handbook Note: The amount of organizational detail to be 
included in legislation is a matter of individual country choice. 
In the example above, only the bare outline has been included 
on the assumption that additional details can be given in the 
national disaster plan and associated plans.]

PART 3 – PLANS AND PROCEDURES

National Disaster Plan

15. There shall be a national disaster plan, approved by the council 
of ministers. The plan is to define the action to be taken to deal with 
disasters in Exland, covering all national land and sea areas. The 
plan is to cover requirements for disaster mitigation, preparedness, 
response, and recovery.

16. The chairperson of the national disaster council is to be 
responsible for ensuring that the plan is periodically reviewed and 
updated as necessary.

17. Government agencies and nongovernment agencies which are 
formally allocated roles under this plan are responsible for making their 
own plans and other arrangements necessary to fulfill such roles.

18. Also under this plan, all agencies involved are required to report 
annually, at a time specified in the plan, to the national disaster 
council, notifying their state of readiness for the coming year.

Local Government and Area Councils

19. Local government and area councils are to issue such 
instructions as may be considered necessary to support the 
provisions and requirements of the national disaster plan.

PART 4 – DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY

20. If the circumstances of a disaster are, or appear likely to become 
beyond the scope, provisions, and resources of the national disaster 
plan, or for any other reasons associated with a disaster, it may 
become necessary to declare a state of emergency. Provision for 

78 

Disaster Management

the declaration of such a state of emergency is contained in Chapter 
13 of the Constitution. A state of emergency may apply to part or the 
whole of Exland.

 [Handbook Note: Most national constitutions contain provision 
for the declaration of a state of emergency. However, where this 
is not so, such provision can be included in disaster legislation.]

PART 5 – SPECIAL POWERS DURING 
A STATE OF EMERGENCY

21. If a state of emergency is declared in accordance with Part 4 
of this Act, the minister responsible—normally on the advice of— 
will recommend to the council of ministers action which may be 
necessary, including the making of regulations, concerning some or 
all of the following aspects:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

 supply and distribution of food, water, fuel, power, medical 
assistance, shelter, and other necessities;
 maintenance of the means of transportation by land, air, or 
water and the control of the transport of persons and things;
 temporary acquisition or control of any property, 
undertaking, or land;
 evacuation of people in their own interest and/or that of 
the public;

(v) entering and search of any premises; and
(vi) 

 payment of compensation and remuneration to persons 
affected by government action under special powers; and
 any other matters which may apply to a specific disaster event.

(vii) 

PART 6 – MISCELLANEOUS

 [Handbook Note: As its name indicates, this section of disaster 
legislation is used to bring together a number of the smaller, but 
nonetheless important, disaster-related matters which benefit 
from legal backing. The examples given below are fairly typical 
of items included under this heading, but see existing examples 
of legislation in appendix D for other items and methods of 
presentation.]

Disaster Legislation 

79

Offense of Obstructing a Disaster Worker

22. A person must not obstruct, hinder, or in any way interfere with 
a person engaging in any activity as a member officer or volunteer 
of an agency performing a role or discharging a responsibility in 
accordance with the national disaster plan, or in accordance with 
any regulations made under a state of emergency.

Immunity from Liability

23. A person engaging in any activity as a member officer or 
authorized volunteer worker of an agency performing a role or 
discharging a responsibility in accordance with the national disaster 
plan shall not be liable in respect of any loss or injury sustained by 
any other person, unless such loss or injury is caused by or arises 
from negligence or willful default.

Claims for Compensation and Remuneration

24. Any person who claims compensation or remuneration for any 
action taken under the national disaster plan and/or any associated 
regulations has the right to submit such a claim or claims to the 
Government of Exland.

Offense of Making a False Compensation Claim

25. A person must not make any false or misleading statement, or 
otherwise attempt to mislead, in making any claim for compensation 
in relation to the provisions of this Act.

Use of Disaster Assistance Donations

26. All donations, in money or any other form, which are made 
either from within Exland or overseas, to help in recovery from 
disaster, or for other disaster-related needs, shall be used for these 
purposes only. Such donations shall not be diverted for any other 
purpose without the authority of the council of ministers and the 
specific agreement of the donor persons, agency, or country.

Regulations

27. The council of ministers may make regulations consistent with 
this Act for or with respect to all matters required or permitted by this 
Act and all matters which, in the opinion of the council of ministers, 

80 

Disaster Management

are necessary or convenient for the proper administration of this Act 
or to achieve the objects and purposes of this Act.

Relationship of this Act to Other Acts

28. Unless specifically provided for under regulations within a declared 
state of emergency, this Act shall not alter or affect the provisions of 
other Acts.

It is reemphasized that the foregoing draft of a National Disaster Act is 

10. 
meant to be a possible example only.

It is suggested that disaster management ofﬁcials who may be required 
11. 
to advise on legislative requirements should use the above example in 
conjunction with a study of the legislation of the Cook Islands, Papua New 
Guinea, and Queensland which are contained in appendix D (and/or with any 
other examples of suitable legislation).

Chapter 8

Counter-Disaster Resources

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to consider the resources that are available 

1. 
in most countries for disaster management purposes.

2. 
As stated in Chapters 3 and 4, the effective use of available resources is 
a major disaster management objective. To achieve this objective, it is evident 
that there must be:

• accurate identiﬁcation of resource;
• correct assessment of their capability;
• allocation of suitable roles to resource organizations; and
• plans and procedures to use resource in a timely and effective 

manner.

3. 

The chapter therefore covers:

types of resources, both national and international;

• 
• evaluation of resource; and
• 

roles and responsibility of resource.

4. 
The information in the chapter has been drawn from a number of 
different countries and is intended to provide a general checklist. Obviously, 
however, users of this handbook need to identify and assess their own 
resources, and allocate roles and responsibilities.

82 

Disaster Management

Types of Resources

5. National resources

Government resources

Departments, section, and agencies covering the following responsibilities:

• Ministry Responsible for Disaster Affairs,
• Police,
• Agriculture,
• Ambulance,
• Attorney-General,
• Audit,
• Broadcasting,
• Civil Aviation,
• Customs and Excise,
• Education,
• Electricity Commision,
• Environment,
• Fireﬁghting Service,
• Finance,
• Fisheries,
• Foreign Affairs,
• Forestry,
• Immigration,
• Information,
• Labor,
• Lands and Survey,
• Marine,
• Medical and Health,
• Meteorology,
• National Development Planning,
• Natural Resources,
• Post and Telecommunications,
• Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce,
• Public Service Commission,
• Public Works,
• Statistics,
• Social Welfare,
• Transport, and
• Treasury.

Counter-Disaster Resources 

83

 Nongovernment r esources

• Airlines,
• Amateur radio operators,
• Aviation resource (ﬂying clubs, private owners, etc.),
• Chambers of Commerce,
• Church and religious groups,
• Community service clubs,
• Food supplier (wholesale and retail),
• General agents,
• public (volunteers, blood donors, etc.),
• Red Cross/Red Crescent,
• Transport companies (private: land and sea), and
• Welfare organizations.

6. 

International Resource
(Chapter 9 on international disaster assistance)

The use of international resources by any country is likely to depend 

on factors, such as:

scale and effectiveness of its own resources;

• 
• bilateral assistance arrangements with allied countries;
• political implications, from a recipient country’s viewpoint of 

• 

accepting international assistance; and
suitability of international resources in a particular disaster 
situation.

The type of international resources most generally needed by stricken countries 
fall into the following broad categories:

• 

 Pre-disaster
Equipment and expertise for developing measures of prevention, 
mitigation, and preparedness; for instance, providing emergency 
communications or developing plans and organizational arrangements.

• During response operations

- Monitoring and warning of a potential threat; and
- Post-impact survey and assessment; for instance, by photographic 
reconnaissance from the air. Providing emergency equipment 
and facilities such as shelter materials, food supplies, and medical 
assistance and, if appropriate, personnel to help distribute and 
use this equipment and facilities.

84 

Disaster Management

• During recovery programs

Technical and other assistance, usually in the form of building 
materials, ﬁnancial grants, agriculture redevelopment programs, etc.

• For future development

Assistance from the resources of overseas governments and international 
organizations, often as an extension of recovery programs.

Source of international assistance may vary for individual countries but usually 
comprise:

• Multilateral organizations and agencies, and
• Bilateral organizations

Evaluation of Resources

7. 
It is important to evaluate national resource organizations to determine 
their suitability and effectiveness for disaster management purposes. This can 
be done under the following headings:

Capability

The ability of resource organizations to carry out designated disaster-
related tasks; for instance, ﬁrst aid, search and rescue, emergency 
feeding, building repairs, welfare assistance, counselling of victims and 
disaster workers, and so on. In this regard, the following need to be 
considered, such as:

• Resource organizations produce their best results when used in their 
most applicable and experienced roles. It is obviously not prudent 
to make fundamental changes to the role of a resource organization 
when it switches to a disaster role.

• Some resource organizations are, by their nature, crisis-oriented; 
for instance, police, ﬁreﬁghting services, ambulance services, and 
defense forces. Other resource organizations are not normally 
 crisis-oriented such as welfare departments. Yet these departments 
may have to work under very difﬁcult and traumatic conditions in 
providing help to disaster victims. Their capability may, therefore, 
be reduced during disaster operations, especially if their members 
are inexperienced. This has happened on various occasions.

• The disaster role capability of resource organizations may vary from 
time to time. This may arise from changes at leadership levels and/

Counter-Disaster Resources 

85

or extensive turnover of staff, both of which tend to lower overall 
experience within the organization.

• The standard role of a resource organization may change for various 
reasons, such as government policy and ﬁnancial constraints. This 
may affect its capability in its disaster role.

The above factors indicate not only the need for careful basic 
evaluation of capability but also the need to monitor and reevaluate as 
circumstances change.

Availability

This is primarily a question of whether the resource organization is 
immediately available to undertake its disaster task, or whether there is 
a lead time (deﬁnite or indeﬁnite) before it can respond.

A number of different factors may affect availability such as:

• nondisaster (or normal) role of organizations. For instance, a hospital 
is unlikely to be able to respond with all its resources to a disaster 
impact. It would have to continue normal responsibilities— even 
if reduced and—therefore, its disaster availability might have to 
be made on a graduated scale. This consideration indicates that, 
in some cases, a gradual availability of resource organizations may 
have to be recognized and accepted;

• availability of volunteer organizations may be subject to some initial 

• 

delays because of difﬁculties in mobilization; and
internal arrangements within resource organizations for switching 
over to disaster roles will also affect availability time scales.

Durability

This concerns the degree to which resource organizations can carry 
out sustained operations and when they need to be relieved by other 
organizations. Some considerations which apply to this aspect are:

• operational circumstances such as extreme weather conditions, 
limited resources, heavy task loads, high levels of damage and 
disruption, and community trauma and suffering.
type of resource organization. A crisis-oriented organization is likely 
to be highly trained and well equipped. It is usually independent 
(i.e., with own communications, transport, feeding arrangements, 
and so on). Also, it is likely to have its own system for rotating 

• 

86 

Disaster Management

personnel. Such crisis-oriented organizations are likely to have 
high-durability levels. Organizations which are not crisis-oriented 
are likely to have lower durability; and
type of operations involved. Some operations (for example, search 
and rescue in a major building collapse or train collision) can be very 
demanding physically and traumatic mentally. Others are less so.

• 

Durability assessment of resource organizations obviously needs to take 
these factors into account.

Operational integrity

This concerns the ability of a resource organization to undertake an 
allotted task and complete it satisfactorily without supervision or 
continuous detailed direction from the disaster direction/coordination 
authority. This is a signiﬁcant factor in the effectiveness of a resource 
organization, since it can be relied on to:

• accept a task,
• complete it, and
• on reporting completion, be ready to accept retasking.

8. 

The Process of Evaluation

The process of evaluating resource organizations should be carried out 
mutually between the disaster management authority (e.g., NDC or its NDMO) 
and the resource organization itself. Experience has shown that if the disaster 
management authority tries to make a general evaluation without consulting 
the resource organization, the evaluation will be inaccurate and misleading.

Roles and Responsibilities of Resource Organizations

9. 
As stated earlier, the information contained in this chapter has been 
drawn from patterns used in a number of different countries. The roles 
and responsibilities detailed in paragraph 10 below will therefore need to 
be adjusted to the circumstances of individual countries. However, they do 
indicate the wide extent to which both government and nongovernment 
agencies should become involved in disaster management.

Counter-Disaster Resources 

87

10. 
In the following examples, it is assumed that there is an NDC and a 
Central Control Group (CCG). Some suggested allocation of roles and 
responsibilities are:

Government Departments, Sections, and Agencies

Ministry Responsible for Disaster Affairs
• Responsible for overall planning, organization, training, public 

awareness, and administration in relation to disaster affairs;

• Provides a permanent secretary as chair of NDC;
• Administers NDMO;
• Maintains liaison with provincial authorities on day-to-day disaster 

management matters; and

• Provides administrative services necessary for functioning of NDC.

The Permanent Secretary
• Responsible to minister for all disaster-related matters;
• Acts as chair of NDC; and
• Directs activities of NDMO.

Police
• Commissioner of police acts as member of NDC and chair of CCG;
• Assistant commissioner of police (Operations) acts as deputy chair 

of CCG;

• Responsible, as in normal role, for maintaining law and order and 
protecting life and property; reinforces critical areas as necessary in 
times of disaster;

• Uses police mobile force as necessary;
• Undertakes and coordinates survey and assessment duties, as 

required by CCG;

• Controls movement in disaster areas and at operational key points.
• Undertakes and coordinates land search and rescue;
• Supervises evacuation operations, as required by NDC;
• Develops disaster-related training within the police force; and
• Takes standard police action to deal with dead persons.

Agriculture
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Undertakes survey and assessment of damage to crops, etc.
• Advises on procedures to safeguard crops, livestock, and equipment 

from effects of disaster;

88 

Disaster Management

• Advises and helps disaster victims whose crops and equipment may 

have been damaged or destroyed;

• Helps in providing replacement seeds and livestock;
• Operates an early warning scheme of food shortage by monitoring 
crop failures and food prices, to give maximum warning of any 
forthcoming shortages; and

• Monitors crop programming aimed at minimizing possible damage 

and destruction during maximum risk seasons.

Ambulance Service
• Deploys resources to maximum effect, as advised by CCG, and
• Undertakes ﬁrst-aid training, as advised by NDC.

 Attorney-General
• Acts as co-opted member of NDC; and
• Advises on all disaster-related legislative matters.

Audit
• Audits disaster-related accounting.

Broadcasting
• Director acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Broadcasts warning and public information, as required by NDC.
• Maintain 24-hour broadcast capability during disaster periods, as 

notiﬁed by NDC/CCG;

• Advises, in broadcast format, of disaster-related warnings and 

public information;

• Advises on broadcast segment of public awareness programs; and
• Helps, where possible, in promoting public awareness as advised 

by chair of NDC.

Civil Aviation
• Provides controller of civil aviation as member of CCG;
• Maintains plans and deals with aircraft accidents and incidents, in 

accordance with international air regulations;

• Helps, where possible, with availability of aircraft for disaster 

operations;

• Makes departmental communications facilities available for disaster 

purposes, as far as possible.

Customs and Excise
• Facilitates entry of all ofﬁcial disaster assistance commodities and 

waives customs and excise duties;

Counter-Disaster Resources 

89

Education
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• On advice of CCG, or on other indications of disaster, takes 

appropriate action to ensure safety of school children;

• Makes available, if required, school buildings nearest to disaster-
affected areas as temporary welfare and evacuation centers (as 
arranged with NDC/CCG);

• Provides staff as administrative managers of buildings being used as 

welfare and evacuation centers;

• Coordinates with other agencies in informing people of impending 

disaster, especially in remote areas;

• Helps, where possible, in assessing damage and reports information 

to police; and
Includes disaster awareness aspects in school programs.

• 

Electricity Commission
• Manager acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Ensures, as disaster preparedness measure, that power lines 
and other installations are kept clear of trees and other possible 
obstructions to power supplies;

• Maintains power supplies at best possible level during emergency 

• 

situations;
Implements public safety measures in danger areas caused by 
damage to plant installations equipment; and

• Restores disrupted power supplies in accordance with priorities 

notiﬁed by NDC/CCG.

Environment
• Permanent Secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC; and
• Advises NDC on environmental issues that may affect disaster 

management.

Fireﬁghting Service
• Advises NDC on ﬁre hazards and ﬁre prevention; and
• Carries out ﬁreﬁghting, rescue, and other appropriate operations.

Finance
• Provides permanent secretary as member of NDC;
• Authorizes release of funds to meet immediate disaster needs;
• Reviews—in conjunction with ministry responsible for disaster affairs 
and ministry responsible for planning—ﬁnancial requirements for 
longer-term relief and recovery, including distribution of monies 
from any national disaster relief fund; and

• Finances stock holdings of disaster-related stores.

90 

Disaster Management

Fisheries
• Undertakes survey and assessment of damage to ﬁsheries areas;
• Assists in assessment of loss or damage to ﬁshing vessels, facilities, 

etc;

• Renders advice and assistance on ﬁsheries aspects; and
• Assists in providing boats, where possible.

Foreign Affairs
• Provides permanent secretary as member of NDC; and
• Processes, through diplomatic channels, offers of and requests for 

overseas disaster assistance.

Forestry
• Undertakes survey and assessment of damage to forest areas; and
• Renders advice and assistance on forestry matters, such as disposal 

and use of trees damaged by disaster.

Immigration
• Facilitates entry of approved international assistance personnel.

Information
• Chief information ofﬁcer acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Advises NDC on media liaison and all information aspects; and
• Drafts approved information in form suitable for issue.

Labor
• Advises NDC on industrial safety and associated matters.

Lands and Survey
• Provides maps and mapping information;
• Provides ﬁeld teams (or team members) in operations requiring 

special ﬁeld knowledge and skills; and
Identiﬁes areas suitable for resettlement of disaster victims.

• 

Marine
• Chief marine ofﬁcer acts as member of CCG;
• Provides support for sea movement of disaster-related personnel, 

supplies and equipment;

• Takes action to deal with maritime accidents; and
• Liaises with local shipping agents for support from foreign and local 

vessels.

Medical and Health
• Provides permanent secretary as member of NDC.

Counter-Disaster Resources 

91

• Provides emergency medical treatment of disaster victims and 

subsequent hospitalization, if necessary;
• Provides medicines and medical supplies;
• 

Institutes preventive and curative measures to check and control 
occurrence and spread of disease;
• Exercises supervision of public health;
• Maintains sanitary conditions in disaster-affected area;
• Checks potability of water supplies;
• Coordinates use of medical teams, medical supplies; equipment 

provided through overseas disaster assistance; and

• Provides medical certiﬁcation for dead persons.

Meteorology
• Director acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Provides weather-related information of potential disasters and 

monitors progress, as required;

• Provides information for public awareness programs;
• Liaises with broadcasting service on broadcast of warning and other 

 weather-related public information; and

• Provides advice to NDC on all meteorological matters.

National Development Planning
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• 

Implements where possible, in national programs, measures 
likely to assist in long-term disaster prevention, mitigation, and 
preparedness; and

• Takes action, as required by Cabinet, to ensure that recovery 

programs are compatible with national development policy.

Natural Resources
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Provides information and advice to NDC concerning possibility of 

earthquakes and volcanic eruptions; and

• Chief geologist acts as co-opted member of NDC.

Posts and Telecommunications
• Provides permanent secretary as member of NDC;
• Ensures rapid repair of damaged telecommunications; and
• Provides emergency communications, as notiﬁed by NDC/CCG.

Prime Minister’s Ofﬁce
• Provides secretary to Cabinet as member of NDC;

92 

Disaster Management

Public Service Commission
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC; and
• Assists in providing extra personnel during an emergency period, 

as requested by NDC.

Public Works
• Permanent secretary acts as member of NDC;
• Assists with survey and assessment of damage;
• Undertakes clearance of roads, airﬁelds, and port areas;
• Restores inoperative or damaged public installations and facilities;
• Undertakes special tasks as requested by NDC; and
• Develops and implements technical measures, such as physical 
planning, zoning, and building codes, for mitigating effects of 
disasters.

Statistics
• Collects, collates, and issues disaster-related data and analyses.

Social Welfare
• Permanent secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;
• Has primary responsibility for relief programs (in which it 
collaborates closely with NGOs’ disaster coordinating committee), 
including the following main aspects:

– Emergency feeding;
– Emergency clothing and household supplies;
– Providing temporary shelter assistance; and
– Providing and managing government buildings as
– evacuation and welfare centers.

Transport
• Permanent secretary acts as member of NDC;
• Maintains in-country information on availability of transport for 

use in counter-disaster operations; and

• Coordinates use of transport, as required by NDC/CCG.

Treasury
• See Finance

 Nongovernment Organizations (NGOs)

Red Cross/Red Crescent
 (Working 
committee)
• Secretary acts as co-opted member of NDC;

in collaboration with NGOs’ disaster coordinating 

Counter-Disaster Resources 

93

• Holds disaster relief stocks and equipment;
• Provides relief items and assistance to disaster victims;
• Undertakes tracing of missing persons;
• Carries out ﬁrst-aid training and welfare and education programs; 

and

• Liaises with other NGOs in coordinating relief work.

Other NGOs
(Roles and tasks regulated and coordinated by NGOs’ disaster 
coordinating committee)
• First aid;
• Assistance with survey and assessment;
• Clothing and household supplies;
• Help in tracing missing persons;
• Assistance in providing temporary shelter;
• Providing and managing nongovernment buildings as evacuation 

and welfare centers;

• Assistance in management of government evacuation and welfare 

centers;

• Assistance with transport;
• Providing temporary storage facilities;
• Assistance with public education and awareness; and
• Assistance with preparedness measures at community level.

11. 
It is reemphasized that the roles and responsibilities outlined in 
paragraph 10 are for purposes of illustration and guidance only. They are 
not necessarily comprehensive or relevant to all government structures. They 
therefore need to be used selectively in individual situations.

12. 

Inclusion of Roles in Plans

Once roles and responsibilities have been established and mutually 
agreed, they need to be clearly set out in all plans and other relevant documents, 
such as:

• national disaster plan;
• provincial disaster pan;
• municipal disaster plan;
local disaster plan;
• 
• departmental operation procedures; and
• 

standard operating procedures

See also Chapter 12 on plans.

94 

Disaster Management

Annex to Chapter 8

MILITARY FORCES IN THE COUNTER-DISASTER ROLE1

Purpose of the Annex

The purpose of the annex is to outline key factors which apply to the 

role of military forces in counter-disaster activities.

Introduction

2. 
The contribution which military forces can make in dealing with disaster 
has long been recognized in many countries throughout the world. This 
contribution has usually been made under some form of ofﬁcial arrangements 
for aid to the civil power, as laid down in national constitutions or special 
legislation.

3. 
However, experience has shown that if military forces are to be fully 
effective in this context, their capabilities must be fully understood by relevant 
counter-disaster authorities; and their roles and responsibilities must be clearly 
deﬁned in counter-disaster plans

Capabilities

The organization and management systems of military forces make 
4. 
them well suited for operation under disaster conditions. In addition, many 
of their normal activities parallel those in public emergency services. Thus 
military forces can offer invaluable support in engineering, communications, 
transport, rescue, emergency medical sevices, ﬁeld sanitation, cooking, water 
supply, and so on.

5. 
The units available to provide these services are usually deployed 
countrywide and close to centers of population, which are where disaster 
may have its most signiﬁcant effect. These military forces have quick reaction 
capability and can respond rapidly, taking with them their own management, 
communications, and administrative systems in a self-contained, self-
sufﬁcient, and highly mobile form. They are well trained in the individual 

1 

 Much information in this Appendix is drawn from the paper entitled The Military Role in Disaster Relief, 
Preparedness and Prevention by Lieut. Colonel G. N. Ritchie, Director of the Cranﬁeld Disaster Preparedness 
Centre, United Kingdom and its use in this handbook is gratefully acknowledged.

Counter-Disaster Resources 

95

skills necessary to perform their professional and functional activities and are 
practiced in collaborative and coordinated action under their own ﬂexible 
management systems.

6. 
Add to this the capability to sustain operations away from their home base 
in all weather conditions by day and by night and one sees clearly the potential 
inherent in any military organization for effective disaster relief operations.

Constraints

Although armed forces do possess the capabilities described above, 
7. 
often there is lack of adequate arrangements in legislation to ensure that they 
are readily available to support the civil community and administration in 
response to disasters arising from natural or man-made causes. Matters are 
usually complicated by the fact that armed forces are outside the normal chain 
of command and communications which link the system of central and local 
government and their supporting public and emergency services. The situation 
may be made more difﬁcult as military commanders may have a different set of 
responsibilities, and loyalties, from those of the local government ofﬁcials and 
administrators requiring their support. Moreover, there is the complication of 
a different set of ﬁnancial controls and authorities, budgets and accountancy, 
procurement, and supply systems.

8. 
In many countries, military commanders at all levels are unlikely to be 
practiced in operations with civilian authorities and public services unused to 
their system of decision making, authority, and responsibility. There is likely 
to be incompatibility in equipment (radio communications, for example) and 
little experience of collaboration in achieving a common task.

9. 
A further factor is the justiﬁable wariness that civil government in many 
countries has of military coups and takeover of government. A situation created 
by a major disaster is one frequently leading to political instability, providing 
opportunities—possibly even the requirement—for the military to assume 
authority and responsibility. Examples exist where the military and civilian 
authorities have been in competition to demonstrate their superior capabilities 
in responding to disaster situations. Nevertheless it can be argued that the 
most effective way to avoid such dangers is to integrate the capabilities of a 
country’s military forces with the civil authority’s, together with the supporting 
public services, at all stages and all levels of counter-disaster planning and 
preparations.

10. This may well require some degree of legislation and ﬁnancial provision 
but the beneﬁts to the administration and the people will be much greater 

96 

Disaster Management

than any bureaucratic inconvenience created. Not only do these military forces 
make a major contribution to disaster relief operations but the resources of 
their technical units, particularly engineers, can also make major contributions 
in disaster prevention.

Sources of Military Assistance in Disaster

11. 

Sovereign Military Forces

There are four principal sources from which military assistance to the 
civil communities are likely to be available. The ﬁrst of these, sovereign national 
forces, is clearly the most readily available and, most importantly, can, as a 
result of their involvement in pre-disaster planning and preparedness, be most 
effectively integrated in meeting the responsibilities of the civil administration 
and its supporting public emergency services.

The regular, full-time military force is probably best trained and equipped for 
this role, but it is equally probable that it may have other responsibilities and 
even operational commitments that constrain its availability when its help is 
most needed. The arguments, therefore, for national militia—that is, part-time 
military forces—to have a signiﬁcant role in counter-disaster action are strong. 
They undoubtedly have the advantage of being a part of the community in 
which they are located, and have a good and current knowledge of local 
resources, the operational area, the disaster threat, and its implications. Their 
ofﬁcers will know and be known by the ofﬁcers of the local civil authority as 
well as public and emergency services. All these will lead to effective degrees of 
coordination and collaboration arising from the knowledge of the availability 
of these capabilities, requirements, and constraints affecting the various plans 
of the availability of these various resources. On the debit side, militia forces 
may lack the skills and equipment of regular forces and may also lack technical 
training. Key members of the force may themselves become victims of the 
disaster or in disaster have family or personal commitments that prevent their 
availability when most needed. Nevertheless, the role which their organization 
and training, location, and local commitment can play in disaster is likely to 
counterbalance these deﬁciencies.

12. 

International Collaboration and Aid

Currently and historically, there is evidence of the collaboration and 
coordination that can be achieved in the groupings of military forces in alliances 
between friendly powers. Although there is much evidence of the effectiveness 
of such collaboration in military operations, there is also evidence of such 
collaboration in disaster. For instance, when the “Herald of Free Enterprise” 
sank in 1988 off the Belgian coast, the levels of collaboration between military 

Counter-Disaster Resources 

97

units from Belgium and the United Kingdom (UK) with civilian emergency 
services were a most signiﬁcant element in the effectiveness of the rescue 
operation. Similar levels of coordination between naval and air forces of North 
Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) countries and civilian rescue services 
were of a very high level during rescue operations after a disastrous oil rig ﬁre 
in the North Sea.

13. Military Forces from Friendly Countries

There have been numerous examples in the past of military assistance— 
principally in the form of transport aircraft and helicopters—being sent from 
friendly countries to help disaster-stricken developing countries. In recent 
years, aircraft of these types from Belgium, Germany, Poland, and the UK have 
collaborated in air delivery and air dropping operations in Ethiopia and Nepal.

At other times, more particularly in areas such as the Caribbean and the South 
Paciﬁc, when island communities have been struck by disaster, naval ships 
have been able to come into a harbor or alongside jetties to provide help in the 
form of manpower, helicopter reconnaissance and airlift, engineering skills, 
fresh water, and even baked bread.

Such forms of help are easily negotiated and provided under existing rules 
and procedures. Foreign aircraft ﬂy into national airﬁelds everyday and 
foreign ships, including naval ships, come in to take water, fresh food, and 
other stores. Their presence is contained within the system operating at ports 
and airports.

However, the introduction of foreign army units that require accommodation—
which are often accompanied by large quantities of equipment—that live and 
work in the community, requires much more careful planning and detailed 
arrangements. Consequently, experience suggests that, for optimum beneﬁt, 
army units should be small, self-contained, and self-supporting; also that they 
remain for a limited time (say, 2–3 weeks during the peak emergency period) 
in the host country. For example, in the Paciﬁc region, army units of Australia, 
France, New Zealand, the UK, and the United States (US) frequently provide 
help on this kind. It is important, of course, that wherever possible such help 
should be part of mutual disaster-preparedness planning.

The Nature of Military Assistance in Disaster

14. The nature and extent of military assistance in disaster will obviously 
depend on the combination of in-country and overseas forces that are available. 
However, the following are typical examples:

98 

Disaster Management

• Air, land, and sea survey and assessment, especially to ascertain 

levels of casualties and damage;

• Reconnaissance in the disaster zone and of the routes within and 

leading toward it;

• Organized and mobile manpower to help in rescue;
• Well-trained and equipped engineers;
• Communications units to provide emergency radio and telephone 

links;

• Logistics units available to handle, store, and transport goods and 

people over all types of roads and routes;

• Emergency medical support to the civilian services;
• Helicopters and aircraft for reconnaissance and transport duties; and
• Provision by naval forces of transport support when in harbor; and 
electrical power, mechanical engineering, water puriﬁcation, long 
distance radio communication, and cooking and baking facilities.

In some disaster-prone countries, military resources have been integrated into 
the national counter-disaster system, from national to the local community 
levels, with valuable results. In other countries, however, the absence of joint 
civil–military planning has prevented the optimum use of military resources.

15. National Level

Effective national disaster–preparedness planning should be based 
upon a logical and realistic analysis of the threat and the vulnerability to the 
threat of communities, infrastructure, and economic assets. In the consequent 
disaster-preparedness planning, responsibilities, and tasks in response to 
disaster occurrence will be identiﬁed at various levels of national and local 
government. As mentioned above, these will include:

• Reconnaissance and reporting upon the damage caused and the 
state of infrastructure and communications and the use of warning 
to endangered communities;

• Rescue, evacuation, and providing life support system (medical aid, 
water, food, and shelter) in emergency centers or camps. Providing 
safe drinking water and emergency sanitation in such circumstances 
is of prime importance;

• Road clearance and the repair of breaks in road and rail 

communications, using temporary bridging equipment;

• Emergency communications (telephone and radio) linking EOCs at 

various levels of government;

• Help in safeguarding evacuated villages or urban areas; and

Counter-Disaster Resources 

99

• Transportation of emergency supplies including water, food, animal 

fodder, emergency shelter, etc.

To ensure the availability of support of this kind from military units in 
emergency, armed forces commanders, at all levels from national to local, must 
be involved in the processes of disaster-preparedness planning with the civil 
government counterparts. Not only will such joint planning ensure that each is 
aware of the requirement and responsibilities of the other but equally important, 
the constraints and restrictions which may affect the provision of military 
assistance will be foreseen. In turn, this awareness will—or should—result in 
various forms of legislation both legal and ﬁscal to clear the way for effective 
collaboration between the civil and military authorities. In this process of 
disaster-preparedness planning, various tasks may be identiﬁed that could lead 
to various degrees of disaster prevention. The construction of retaining walls, 
ﬂood protection embankments, the deepening or clearance of river channels, 
and the development of safe evacuation routes, are all tasks which have been 
undertaken by military engineers in support of national disaster prevention in 
various countries. Disaster-preparedness planning is likely to include logistic 
plans for evacuation and emergency support. Logistics is a military activity to 
which much time is devoted in the training of staff ofﬁcers and practice in units. 
Logistic operations planning, as an element of disaster preparedness planning, 
is a responsibility that can be usefully placed on the military member of any 
disaster-preparedness planning group. Provision should also be made to ensure 
that military transport is available to support such logistic operations.

The military can also be usefully involved at the community level in public 
information and training programs. These activities can include ﬁrst aid 
training, simple ﬁeld engineering relating to providing drinking water, 
drainage, and ﬁeld hygiene.

The use of helicopters as a means of reconnaissance, emergency rescue, 
evacuation, and supply has become a feature of disaster response in many 
situations. Helicopter operations are extremely expensive and are dependent 
upon a high degree of ground support. Although it will not be possible to 
train members of a community to assist in these operations, it is possible to 
ensure that selected individuals in communities are aware of the requirements 
for a cleared landing site as well as its dimensions and the necessity to keep 
this area clear of people and to indicate the wind direction on the ground. 
These are requirements well understood at all levels in military units and 
the military responsibility can be to ensure that these are passed on to the 
civil community.

Food-for-work projects in predominantly agricultural communities can 
form important elements of disaster-preparedness planning in relation to 

100 Disaster Management

rehabilitation and recovery. Many food-for-work projects are engineering tasks 
related to local requirements to create and develop tracks, roads, irrigation 
and drainage, river crossings, and work of this kind. Although the planning 
and ﬁnancing of such work must lie with the community and the civil 
administration, the employment of military engineers to provide technical 
skills and equipment, supervision of local labor, and logistic support can be 
an important element of food-for-work projects.

16. 

Regional and International Level

The successful introduction of foreign—albeit allied and friendly armed 
forces in disaster relief operations—depends upon careful consideration of the 
relief tasks, the implication and support needs that such foreign forces may 
require. Regional associations such as NATO and the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN) provide a sound basis upon which planning can take 
place and examples and experience of such support are available to provide 
useful guidelines.

Problems concerning immigration, customs clearance, health requirements, 
logistics support, and costs should be considered and the necessary 
arrangements made as part of the national disaster–preparedness plan. Even 
if arrangements and agreements are not ﬁnalized at this planing stage, a 
detailed analysis of the implications and requirements should be made so 
that a checklist can be prepared of necessary actions when disaster strikes. 
The national armed forces headquarters is clearly the level of responsibility 
at which such studies and planning should take place. They should also be 
responsible for identifying and training liaison ofﬁcers for attachment to 
visiting armed forces units.

Conclusion

17. 
 The potential, particularly at the national level, of the armed services to 
provide well organized, trained, and equipped support to the civil authorities 
and emergency services is great and should become an element of all disaster- 
preparedness plans.

Chapter 9

International Disaster 
Assistance

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the main factors which apply 

1. 
to international disaster assistance. The chapter covers the following:

• Modern concept of international disaster assistance;
• Types of assistance;
• Main sources of assistance;
• Arrangements by recipient countries;
• Local problems arising from international assistance; and
• Relationship between donors and recipients.

Various references to international disaster assistance have been made 

2. 
in earlier parts of this handbook such as in Chapters 1, 4, 6, and 8.

Where necessary, for ease of handbook utilization, these references are 
reiterated in this chapter.

Modern Concept of International 
Disaster Assistance

3. 
The concept of international assistance is obviously not new. It dates 
far back into history and is, perhaps, best exempliﬁed in its earliest forms 
by military alliances of various kinds. However, its modern era could be 
said to start with the US Marshall Plan immediately following World War II. 
This, in fact, constituted international disaster assistance on a massive scale. 
Europe had been shattered by the disaster of global war. It was clearly going 
to be threatened by political, economic, and social uncertainties unless it 
could be given substantial help toward recovery. The Marshall Plan aimed to 
rehabilitate the economies of the post-World War II European nations to create 
stable conditions in which democratic institutions could survive. The plan’s 

102 Disaster Management

concept of economic funding was so successful that it was later extended to 
underdeveloped countries worldwide.

4. 
In parallel with these international assistance activities of the US, other 
programs began to develop. These were mainly concerned with countries that 
were achieving independence from former colonial powers such as Britain, 
France, Holland, and Germany. It is interesting, in the context of this chapter, 
that there was a strong contention by many of these newly independent 
countries that assistance programs should be implemented on a basis of “aid-
without-strings.”

5. 
The signiﬁcant point about this background of international assistance 
is that it provides a great deal of experience and precedent on which to 
develop current and future disaster assistance programs. Indeed, there is 
no doubt that the modern concept of international disaster assistance has 
beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from this previous and more general experience. Thus, 
today, there is a reasonably clear understanding—by both funding agencies 
and recipients—what is involved in disaster assistance generally. Moreover, 
the increasing interdependence of nations tends to give disaster assistance a 
respectable image and make it an acceptable part of international relations. 
This is not to say that all disaster assistance programs are without their 
difﬁculties; in fact, some of these difﬁculties are outlined in paragraph 20. 
However, the fact remains that the overall concept of international disaster 
assistance is currently recognized by most nations as being valid, practicable, 
and productive.

6. What should also be recognized (and this is probably the most important 
factor of all) is that it must be the prerogative of a stricken country to decide 
whether or not it needs international disaster assistance. To impose or pressure 
such assistance without full regard for a nation’s wishes is to defeat the whole 
spirit and intention of today’s development concept. (See also paragraph 22 
concerning donor/recipient relations.)

Types of International Assistance

Brief reference to the use of international resources is made in Chapter 8. 

7. 
The main types of international assistance are ampliﬁed in paragraphs 8–11. 

8. 

Pre-Disaster Assistance

 Pre-disaster assistance from international sources can take a variety of 

forms. The following are typical examples:

International Disaster Assistance 

103

Assistance in prevention/mitigation

• Assistance in building a system of dams, aimed to prevent 

ﬂooding.

• Development of monitoring and warning systems; for instance, for 

volcanic eruption.

Assistance in preparedness

• Planning – Providing assistance in formulating plans at national 
and other levels; also with departmental operational guidelines and 
standard operating procedures.

• Organization – Providing assistance in establishing and developing 
disaster management organizational structures or key points; for 
instance, the establishment of a national disaster management 
center, ofﬁce, or section.

• Systems and facilities – Providing or assisting with:

warning systems;
communications systems;
emergency operations centers;
emergency broadcasting systems; and
protection of key installations, such as power supplies.
• Equipment – Stockpiling of emergency items such as generators, 
chainsaws, shovels, cooking equipment, shelter materials, and 
medical equipment.

• Training – Providing overseas training; assisting with in-country 

training.

9. 

Assistance in Response Operations

As with pre-disaster circumstances, assistance in response operations 

can also take various forms. Some common examples are:

• Monitoring and warning of potential disaster impact; for instance, 
assistance from world meteorological networks or tsunami warning 
centers.

• Post-impact survey and assessment; for instance, aerial photographic 

or visual reconnaissance.

• Providing emergency assistance teams; for instance, medical teams, 

defense force teams, other specialist teams.

• Providing emergency equipment and supplies; for instance, 
communications, generator, clothing, shelter materials, food, 
transport and medical supplies.

104 Disaster Management

• Providing specialist personnel; for instance, to install and operate 

water puriﬁcation plant.

• Providing temporary major response capabilities; for instance, 
helicopter capability for various emergency roles (including survey 
and assessment and food distribution), shipping capability for 
movement of heavy/bulky supplies, off-road vehicle capability.

10. Assistance in Recovery Programs

The post-disaster recovery process usually consists of a series of distinct 
but interrelated programs; for instance, covering infrastructure, medical and 
health systems, education facilities, and so on. International assistance may 
therefore be directed toward a speciﬁc recovery program or comprise some 
form of contribution to overall recovery, such as:

• ﬁnancial grants or credits,
• building materials,
• 
technical equipment,
• agriculture rehabilitation,
• extended feeding program,
• 
• 

specialists or specialist teams,
food-for-work program.

11. Assistance in Future Development

In many cases, international assistance in post-disaster recovery may 
develop or merge into long-term development programs; for instance, 
development of transport systems, agriculture programs.

Sources of International Assistance

12. 
Sources of international assistance may vary in the case of individual 
countries, depending on geographical position, regional groupings, and other 
factors. It is therefore advisable for each country to make a careful survey of the 
possible sources that are most suitable and convenient for its own needs.

13. A factor to be taken into account when considering international 
assistance is the existence, in-country, of various organizations such as the 
Red Cross, ADRA, and World Vision, because these already have day-to-day 
international links.

International Disaster Assistance 

105

Arrangements by Recipient Countries

14. One key factor in international assistance is the effectiveness of the 
planning and preparedness arrangements made by potential recipient countries. 
These arrangements need to cover a number of aspects, as indicated below.

15. Types of Assistance

In paragraphs 8–11, likely types of assistance are divided into four 

broad categories, as follows:

• pre-disaster assistance,
• assistance in response operations,
• assistance in recovery programs, and
• assistance in future development.

Pre-disaster assistance and assistance in future development tend to be of 
a routine nature and can be processed generally to the same time scale as 
other international relations. Assistance in response operations and recovery 
programs usually has a high degree of urgency, which necessitates the 
application of streamlined arrangements. However, it is suggested that all four 
categories of assistance should be processed through a common in-country 
system. This is desirable in the interests of effective coordination, and to 
adhere to the principle of not changing systems or procedures to deal with 
crisis situations.

The proposals contained in paragraphs 16–19 have been made with the 
foregoing considerations in mind.

16. Deﬁnition of Responsibility

The responsibility for dealing with international assistance needs 
to be clearly deﬁned, especially so that under the pressures of disaster 
impact there can be no doubt as to who should take relevant action. There 
are various options for covering this deﬁnition of responsibility and two 
possible options are outlined subsequently. However, it must be emphasized 
that whatever system is used, it should be clearly set out in the national 
disaster plan and other relevant documents. It is also important that the 
chosen system should adequately cover day-to-day liaison as well as urgent 
response and recovery action.

106 Disaster Management

Option 1

Cabinet Responsibility
To vest ministerial authority in the Prime Minister but to deal, as 
required, with matters of special national/international importance.

Prime Minister
To be responsible for policy decisions concerning:
• 
types and scales of assistance required; and
• use of international support services and relief commodities.

National Disaster Council
• 

• 

 To be responsible for advising the Prime Minister on matters 
concerning international assistance.
 To be responsible, during nondisaster times, for ensuring that 
adequate arrangements are in place concerning international 
assistance.

International Assistance Group
• 

 To be responsible for keeping under review all appropriate aspects 
of disaster-related assistance and to advise NDC accordingly.

Option 2

To include the permanent secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs 
as a member of the NDC and process international assistance matters 
through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the normal way.

Clearly, the choice of any option will depend on individual country 
circumstances, particularly its size. However, it is important to bear in mind 
that international relations need to be processed from the national level and 
not lower levels of government.

17. Assistance Channels

It is also important, in relation to paragraph 16, that the channels for 
dealing with international assistance should be deﬁned and well understood 
by both recipients and donors. These arrangements should therefore be 
clearly stated in the national disaster plan and any bilateral memorandum of 
understanding that might include disaster assistance.

International Disaster Assistance 

107

18. Assessment of Likely Requirements

In cases where urgent assistance may be needed (as in response and 
recovery operations), it is helpful if the recipient country has a reasonably 
accurate idea of the type and scale of assistance requirements. To this end, the 
following actions by the recipient country should be considered:

• To ensure that an up-to-date inventory exists of emergency supplies 

and equipment already held in-country.

• To list, based on previous experience and/or the experience of similar 
countries, the items most likely to be required (tents, generators, 
etc.) and in what quantities. This, compared with the inventory of 
existing stocks, should give a very broad guide to what might be 
required initially for any particular disaster event.

• To ascertain, in general terms, what types of assistance are likely to 

be available from main funding sources.

• To try to delay a request for funding, or to give a holding reply 
to funding offers, rather than allow a hurried assistance program 
to be introduced. This kind of decision or approach is not easy 
in circumstances where many disruptions and pressures apply. 
However, the point is worth noting as a desirable guideline.

• To ensure that, as far as possible, items which are known to be 
unusable under in-country conditions are excluded from requests 
or offers of assistance.

• To ensure that requests for assistance are made in terms and 
categories that are clearly understandable to funding organizations 
and that the correct channels and procedures are used.

19. Reception and Use of International Assistance

One most damaging aspect of international assistance is inefﬁciency 
by the recipient country in arranging for reception and use of resources and 
commodities. For instance:

• 

• 

• 

If valuable supplies cannot be properly stored and therefore are left 
on wharves to deteriorate under conditions of post-cyclonic rain, or 
similar circumstances.
If helicopter assistance units cannot be fully used because of 
insufﬁcient survey and assessment information for their tasking.
If the scale of assistance requested and accepted is beyond the 
capacity of the recipient country:
– 
– 

to process through ports, airﬁelds, or overland routes; and/or
to distribute effectively, perhaps due to lack of transport or 
inadequate transport routes.

108 Disaster Management

It is therefore most important that these issues should have been carefully 
considered during the planning process and appropriate arrangements laid 
down in relevant plans. In this regard, it is recognized that disaster itself (e.g., 
secondary earthquake shocks) may disrupt planned arrangements but, clearly, 
this kind of contingency has to be accepted by both recipient and funding 
agency or source alike.

Local Problems Arising 
from International Assistance

In some circumstances, problems can arise locally from international 
20. 
assistance, albeit indirectly. Some examples drawn from case studies are given 
below:

• 

 Overdependence on assistance
In some countries, it has been found that overdependence on 
assistance can develop. For instance, traditional custom in one 
country has been for communities and individuals to store food 
items in readiness for the cyclone season. However, over a period 
of years, the government—using international as well as national 
resources—has quickly responded to post-disaster needs by 
liberally distributing food. Consequently, the former tradition of 
 self-reliance has been eroded and overdependence on assistance 
has taken its place.

• Effects on local economy

Rapid injection of assistance, especially food items, can upset a local 
economy. This particularly applies when local markets and rural 
production are interdependent. However, governments are often 
in a dilemma immediately post-impact for a number of reasons, 
including the following:

– Often, local food stocks held in stores and warehouses may be 
damaged by the disaster; or bulk refrigerated goods may face 
deterioration through lack of power supply. To minimize food 
wastage, therefore, a government may sometimes be forced to 
buy up local stocks and distribute them as food assistance. This 
can upset local markets, even before international assistance 
appears on the scene.

– 

International assistance—prompted by the best of humanitarian 
reasons—may arrive very early after impact, while local food 
stocks are still adequate. This can embarrass the local situation 

International Disaster Assistance 

109

but the recipient government, in the interest of good relations, 
is not in a position to reject such assistance.

The effects on a local economy can usually be rectiﬁed in the longer 
term. However, in immediate post-impact conditions, they can add 
considerably to the problems and pressures. Moreover, hardship is 
often imposed on rural food producers as they struggle to rehabilitate 
their business and reestablish former market outlets.

• 

 Oversupply of assistance
 Oversupply of assistance is another well-known problem area 
which can particularly apply to severe and widely publicized 
disasters. It may result in assistance of all sorts, shapes, and forms 
being showered on a stricken nation, with little or no regard for its 
suitability or the amount of assistance already received.

In one recorded case, a large supply of yellow bikinis was sent 
to refugees trying to subsist in semi-arctic conditions. In another 
case, supplies of high-heeled shoes were sent to victims who were 
never likely to wear them. In a third case, a well-meaning overseas 
community collected a huge amount of fruits and had it ﬂown by 
chartered aircraft to a neighboring country. On arrival, the fruits 
had to be destroyed because of the danger of introducing fruitﬂy 
and thus risking the future of indigenous crops.

21. 
It must be emphasized that the examples quoted in the foregoing 
paragraph are in no way intended as a criticism of the international assistance 
principle. They are included to serve as a reminder of the very real problems 
which can arise, particularly in the unsettled circumstances which apply 
following disaster impact. Indeed, the encouraging signs are that the general 
situation is steadily improving, A great deal of experience has now been accrued 
by a wide range of funding countries and organizations so that, hopefully, the 
local problems of recipient nations will be kept to reasonable levels.

The Relationship between Funding Sources and Recipients

22. There is no doubt that the success of international assistance efforts 
depends very signiﬁcantly on the understanding between assistance agencies 
and recipient nations. This particularly applies to mutual preparedness 
arrangements. In the past, there have certainly been instances where better 
donor–recipient preparedness would have eliminated many problems.

In fact, most of the major problems in international assistance can be avoided 
if the following factors are recognized:

110 Disaster Management

• Assistance agencies need to exercise a sensitive approach. When 
assistance is needed, the recipient nation is usually in some form 
of post-impact shock. The shock period can extend well into the 
recovery phase and is particularly illustrated by difﬁculty in 
identifying assistance needs.

• Assistance agencies also need to be patient. From the recipient 
viewpoint, there is nothing more aggravating and counterproductive 
than impatient overkill in assistance offers.

• The practical preparedness measures of assistance agencies are also 
important. An understanding of likely in-country circumstances, of 
logistical considerations, and of local conditions that affect receipt 
and use of assistance commodities, is a key factor in successful 
assistance.

• Optimum coordination between government and nongovernment 
agencies is strongly desirable, from both the in-country and overseas 
viewpoints.

Overall, the desirable concept is one of a tactful mutual relationship 
throughout the whole process of preparedness, response, and recovery. In 
this way, when assistance needs to be applied, it is merely one phase of 
an ongoing dialogue, rather than a sudden shock injection into an already 
traumatized recipient country.

Chapter 10

Leadership in Disaster

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the main considerations which 

1. 
apply to leadership in disaster. The chapter covers:

leadership under conditions of crisis;
some ramiﬁcations of political leadership;
leadership in the direction of response operations;
leadership in resource organizations;

• 
• 
• 
• 
• community leadership; and
• 

some leadership attributes and desirabilities.

Leadership under Crisis Conditions

2. 
In all nations and all societies, leadership has a prominent and powerful 
role. It inﬂuences all aspects of life through all levels. If we do not like our 
leaders, or if we grow tired of them, we make changes. Mostly we do this by 
peaceful means. Sometimes, however, the change is violent.

3. 
Just as leaders may change, so do leadership needs and requirements. 
This usually happens because societies are constantly adjusting to change and 
development. Under stable conditions (that is, when a nation is not affected 
by war, civil unrest, disaster, or other forms of disruption), although the tasks 
of leaders may be onerous, they mostly tend to be orderly and reasonably 
straightforward. There is usually time to make calculated decisions based on 
methodical assessment of the various factors involved. Indeed, quite often, 
decisions are made only after a process of consideration and reconsideration, of 
drafting and redrafting. Also, there is normally a well-founded organizational 
system within which this process takes place, plus a framework of legislation 
to provide formalized support and conﬁrmation. Even so, in spite of stable 
conditions, some leaders have to operate under unpleasant and stressful 
circumstances. For instance, leaders of ﬁreﬁghting teams carrying out what 
for them are normal duties, often have to accept high risks themselves and 
make decisions that affect the safety and lives of others.

112 Disaster Management

4. 
By contrast, under unstable and disruptive conditions such as those 
which apply in disaster, the tasks of leaders usually become more difﬁcult. 
This applies at most, if not all levels, from government ministers through to 
village leaders. Some of the factors which may affect leadership during disaster 
conditions are:

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

loss of some designated leaders, who may be put out of action by 
the disaster itself;
failure of designated leaders to cope in traumatic conditions with 
which they are not experienced;
reduced effectiveness of subordinates because of various crisis effects;
lack of information on which to make decisions; or inadequate 
facilities for presenting information to leaders/decision makers;
lack of or disruption to communications, which inhibits the ability of 
leaders to consult with other key persons, or to convey instructions 
rapidly and clearly;
severity of post-impact conditions which may make it difﬁcult for 
leaders to determine courses of action and priorities; and
loss or delayed availability of resources in terms of personnel, 
equipment, transport, relief commodities, and so on.

There can, of course, be many other factors which affect leadership under 
disaster circumstances, depending on speciﬁc situations. However, those 
mentioned above serve to illustrate this particular point.

5. What is equally or perhaps even more signiﬁcant is that the importance 
of decision making at various levels may vary from that which normally 
applies. In fact, in many instances, the relative importance of decision-making 
levels may be reversed. This can apply particularly in the early post-impact 
stages of a disaster when decisions taken at the “disaster front” (i.e., within 
the stricken area) may be more crucial than those taken at national provincial 
levels. Enlarging upon this point, some or all of the following considerations 
may apply:

• Prudent decision on precautionary measures during a pre-impact 
warning period, taken by leaders at, say, municipal or village 
level, may ensure that communities are in safe havens or protected 
areas when disaster impact occurs. This obviously mitigates 
disaster effect.

• Decisions by those same leaders concerning post-impact priorities 
for rescue, temporary evacuation, or other action may be crucial to 
the lives and livelihood of large numbers of people.

• Decisions to organize and implement self-help measures—pending 
assistance from outside—may signiﬁcantly defer or alleviate potential 

Leadership in Disaster 

113

hardship for those who have lost their home and/or means 
of sustenance.

• The tangible strength of leadership shown by local leaders through 
personal example, courage, and demeanor may be far more 
signiﬁcant to large numbers of disaster-affected people than, 
for example, stirring television or radio messages sent by senior 
government ministers who are in areas of relative safety.
If there is undue delay (real or perceived) in mobilizing in-country 
resources to relieve a stricken area, then the credibility of leadership 
at higher levels of government is likely to come under question.
• Similarly, if the national government is seen as not making best 
possible use of overseas assistance, its future right to leadership 
may be challenged politically.

• 

It is clear therefore that conditions of disaster impose many unusual 
6. 
pressures and demands on leaders at all levels. In disaster management terms, 
this clearly indicates the need to analyze and study leadership requirements 
and, where possible, to attune and train key persons accordingly.

Some Ramiﬁcations of Political Leadership

7. 
Certain aspects that affect political leadership have already been 
aforementioned. However, the policies and attitudes adopted by political 
leaders may have far-reaching ramiﬁcations for disaster management and, 
in particular, for response operations and recovery programs. These effects 
can be illustrated by considering circumstances prior to, during, and after 
disaster impact.

8. 

Pre-Disaster Considerations

Regrettably, it has to be said that political leadership can expose whole 
nations to the threat of disaster. There are many reasons for this, some of which 
already been referred to in Chapter 3 on national disaster management policy. 
However, within the speciﬁc context of this current chapter, some examples of 
the ramiﬁcations of political leadership are given below:

• The apathy of political leaders to the disaster aspect of national 
affairs can be signiﬁcant. This can occur for a variety of reasons and 
sometimes amounts to a form of calculated risk-taking. However, 
when it does occur, the whole capability of a nation to cope with 
disaster is seriously or sometimes dangerously downgraded.

• The threat of disaster and the true signiﬁcance of disaster effects 
may be underrated by political leaders. This may particularly 

114 Disaster Management

apply if the disaster threat is low key and spasmodic, and if no 
consideration has been given to risk analysis and vulnerability 
assessment.

• There may be overreliance by political leaders on the willingness 
and capacity of friendly countries and international organizations 
to provide rapid assistance if disaster strikes.

• Perhaps in consequence of some or all the foregoing factors, no 
 in-country organization has been set up to monitor and advise on 
 disaster-related affairs. Thus, overall national awareness is low and 
preparedness virtually inexistent.

In sum, the effects of inadequate political leadership on these pre-disaster 
requirements is to produce a nation that is inadequately prepared to cope with 
disaster. People therefore suffer unduly and national assets and development 
are seriously jeopardized.

9. 

Considerations during Disaster

Immediately prior to and following disaster impact—during what 
is usually called the emergency phase—political leaders can decide in the 
spur of the moment, which may produce far-reaching results, some of them 
counterproductive. The following examples, drawn from factual circumstance, 
serve to underline this contention:

• A senior minister, acting in the absence of his prime minister, 
completely ignored the existence of national and regional disaster 
plans, even though these plans had proved effective in an earlier 
disaster. He set up a dubious ad hoc organization at national 
level and attempted to run all counter-disaster activities from this 
level, disregarding established government organizations at lower 
levels. It took approximately seven precious days to disentangle 
this ad hoc organization and replace it by the more orthodox one 
intended under existing plans. The result was that people suffered 
unnecessarily due to delay in relief operations.
In contrast, on another occasion, the reversal of an original ministerial 
decision markedly improved response action. This case involved 
the establishment of a standard-type national emergency operations 
center (NEOC) to replace a somewhat loose committee system. The 
great advantage of the NEOC was that it provided a much-needed 
“information picture” on which to base decisions and priorities.
• During a complicated relief operations in the wake of a major 
disaster, a senior politician openly abused a very experienced 
disaster management ofﬁcial, accusing him and his colleagues of 

• 

Leadership in Disaster 

115

gross incompetence. The politician had no disaster management 
experience and knew nothing of the complexity and extent of 
the relief operation. He was merely concerned to illustrate to his 
political supporters that he was shaking up the system, supposedly 
on their behalf. His ill-informed efforts achieved nothing apart from 
wasting the time of ofﬁcials who had to make important decisions 
and to fulﬁll critical relief tasks.
In another instance, a prime minister ruled that government 
ministers were not be involved in the post-disaster distribution 
of relief supplies. He particularly banned them from participating 
in helicopter supply missions. His action was aimed at ensuring 
that no political pressures were brought to bear that might lead to 
unequal and unfair distribution of assistance.

• 

• One extreme case is, hopefully, a rarity. Priority in relief assistance 

was given to members of the ruling political party.

It would, of course, be inaccurate to infer that political interests in emergency 
operations are ill-considered and wrongly motivated. Disaster raises many 
aspects of political involvement and, indeed, affected communities can 
justiﬁably expect that their elected representatives will look after the peoples’ 
interests in time of need. The important thing from a disaster management 
viewpoint is that there should be recognition of the fact that political 
intervention is highly likely to occur in varying forms; and that disaster 
managers—especially those with senior responsibilities—should be aware of 
this and be prepared to handle the resultant problems.

10. Post-Disaster Considerations

In post-disaster recovery and associated development programs, political 
leadership clearly plays a primary role. In this context, decision making 
tends to have very profound long-term effects. Ideally such decision making 
normally needs to involve:

• an optimum data base, including relevant factors from the current 
disaster and from previous ones, plus projections for feasible future 
development;

• clear deﬁnition of post-disaster recovery and development strategy;
• accurate determination of individual programs within such strategy;
• clear deﬁnition of responsibility for implementing the strategy and 

its component programs;

• effective management and coordination of programs/projects; and
• 

relevant adjustments, where applicable, to current and future 
national development plans.

116 Disaster Management

Unfortunately, it is not always possible to adhere to the foregoing desirabilities. 
Factors which affect this may include the following:

• 

recording of relevant data during the emergency phase has not been 
adequate;*

• 

• post-disaster review has not been effectively carried out,*
[* Both these items may be crucial for providing an adequate data 
base.];
special committees or commissions set up to review the disaster, 
or selected aspects of it, may produce ﬁndings that are politically 
unpalatable. Such ﬁndings are therefore conveniently disregarded or 
given low priority. A case is known where a government, having set 
up a special disaster review commission, used the relevant ﬁndings 
to give the impression that it (the government) had already taken 
 preemptive action on the many shortcomings revealed.

• Funding sources of international assistance may pressure an 
affected government into premature decisions. This may arise from 
budgeting, programming, or similar requirements on the funding 
sources’ side.

• The timing of recovery programming may be such that the 
government—for reasons of retaining political power—needs 
to be seen as acting vigorously and quickly. This may lead to 
programs being prematurely approved, thus forfeiting some of 
their effectiveness.

11. The considerations outlined above clearly indicate the importance of 
political leadership and decision making in relation to the total spectrum 
of disaster management. One extremely important corollary is that national 
leaders and politicians at all levels need to be kept aware of disaster problems 
and of the necessary countermeasures. As with other aspects of government, 
it is the responsibility of senior ofﬁcials to ensure that this awareness is 
maintained. In turn, this requirement underlines yet again the need for some 
kind of disaster management section within a government that can monitor 
policies and programs.

Leadership in the Direction of Response Operations

12. As indicated in Chapter 2, the effects of disaster impact can be wide-
ranging and traumatic. This means that response operations usually have 
to be carried out under conditions that place heavy personal demands on 
both victims and disaster management personnel. Thus, the direction of such 
operations obviously calls for a clear and decisive leadership. However, it is 
often difﬁcult to achieve effective response leadership for reasons such as those 
outlined on the next page.

Leadership in Disaster 

117

13. The Problem of Operational Coherency

It is often difﬁcult for senior disaster management ofﬁcials (e.g., 
those responsible for the direction of response operations) to maintain and 
implement a coherent operational plan of action. For instance, in post-cyclonic 
conditions of very low cloud and heavy rain, it may be impossible to carry out 
vital air reconnaissance. Similarly, a very fast-moving wildﬁre (bushﬁre) front 
may make it extremely difﬁcult to mobilize and apply resource organizations 
to full effect. Response leaders need to be aware of possible problems in 
operational coherency and to recognize the limitations these can impose, 
albeit temporarily, on the effectiveness of operations.

14. Access and Movement

Closely linked to the problem of operational coherency is that of 
access to and movement within a disaster area. This can apply to various 
circumstances, from a highly toxic industrial disaster to a post-cyclonic 
mudslide/landslide. Airborne resources can solve some of the problems 
inherent in these situations.

15. Quality of Resource Organizations

(See also paragraph 19)

The effective overall leadership of response operations can also be 
inﬂuenced by the quality of the resource organizations involved. If these 
organizations are highly skilled, self-contained in logistics and communications, 
and experienced in the type of operations being undertaken, then the task of 
overall leaders/coordinators tends to be simpliﬁed. This can be a signiﬁcant 
factor under most circumstances but especially when the response task is 
extensive and complicated.

16. Problems of Coordination

A frequent problem in the direction of response operations is 
coordinating the various activities undertaken by resource organizations. 
(This problem is also referred to in Chapters 4 and 17). Wide international 
experience tends to indicate that there is no easy solution to this problem. 
However, from a leader’s viewpoint, it is important to understand that success 
or failure in achieving coordinated effort by resource organizations will depend 
signiﬁcantly on the following:

• capability, experience, and personal qualities of the coordinating 

leader(s);

118 Disaster Management

• quality of leaders of resource organizations;
• professional competence of individual organizations;
• previous experience of these organizations 

in dealing with 

• 

disaster problems, especially in conjunction with other organizations;
relationships between the coordinating leader(s) and leaders of 
individual resource organizations, and between individual leaders 
themselves;

• practice in coordination during exercises; and
• clear allocation of roles to individual organizations and adherence 

to such roles, in terms of both tasking and implementation.

17. Delegation of Leadership Responsibilities

Another common shortcoming in response leadership is failure or 
inability to delegate responsibility. Because events immediately post-impact 
are complicated, urgent and pressurized, many leaders seem to think that 
they “must see the crisis through.” Almost inevitably, this leads to overwork, 
strain, and fatigue, in consequence of which the capability, competence and, 
especially, judgment of leaders become seriously downgraded. In other words, 
there is absolutely no point in leaders carrying on until they are “dead on their 
feet.” Therefore, it is prudent, wherever possible, to direct response operations 
as a team (e.g., an operations control group of three members) that allows for 
adequate sharing of leadership responsibilities and pressures.

18. 
In sum, effective leadership of response operations depends greatly on 
recognizing the types of problems likely to arise and endeavoring to offset 
them by prudent management and preparedness. In this regard, a valuable 
guideline for overall leaders/coordinators is to task resource organizations 
accurately and then leave the organizations to complete their tasks using their 
own systems and procedures.

Leadership in Resource Organizations

19. As indicated in paragraph 15, high-quality resource organizations 
represent a considerable asset in overall response capability. In this respect, 
leadership of individual organizations is obviously an important consideration. 
However, perhaps the only common factor which can be said to apply to the 
leadership of resource organizations is that its requirements can vary greatly. 
There are several reasons for this, including the following:

• The nature of the organizations; some are professional and full-

time, while others are voluntary and part time.

Leadership in Disaster 

119

• The different tasks undertaken by resource organizations tend 
to require different leadership emphasis and characteristics. For 
example, a debris-clearance or rescue team usually requires a 
vigorous, physically tough type of approach. By contrast, the essence 
of approach and action by a welfare team is more oriented toward 
care and comforting; yet these teams may have to face considerable 
strain transmitted from distressed and traumatized victims.

• Changes in leadership and/or membership of resource organizations.
• Changes in capability of organizations because of various factors 
such as loss of experienced team members, or temporary allocation 
of organizations to unfamiliar tasks.
If the disaster threat is spasmodic and low level, it may be difﬁcult 
to maintain enthusiasm and skill levels, especially in voluntary 
organizations.

• 

There are therefore many demands and challenges facing leaders of resource 
organizations if the ideal counter-disaster requirements is to be met. This 
requirement is that the overall response leader/coordinator can task individual 
resource organizations in the knowledge that, under their respective leaders, 
tasks will be completed competently and expeditiously.

Community Leadership

20. 
Leadership at community or local level is another very signiﬁcant factor 
in disaster management. It is suggested that it is particularly important for 
disaster management ofﬁcials, at all levels, to have a good understanding of 
leadership at this level because of its “disaster front” ramiﬁcations.

21. 

Some important factors that affect community leadership are as follows:

• As mentioned on several occasions previously, the nature, severity, 
and frequency of the disaster threat will strongly condition 
community attitudes and leadership. An aware, alert, and informed 
community constitutes an enormously strong asset for coping 
with disaster, particularly since such a community will respond to 
elected leadership.
In times of disaster, communities tend to turn to established 
and traditional sources of leadership. The sources may comprise 
local councils and similar organizations or individuals who are 
recognized as holding hierarchical leadership positions. This aspect 
also underlines the fact that it is not prudent to try to change 
established community systems to deal with disaster.

• 

• The attitudes of higher levels of government may also affect 
community leadership. If a government is unduly paternalistic and 

120 Disaster Management

its control reaches right down into the roots of the community, that 
community may lose initiative and self-reliance. Therefore, when 
it is perforce left to its own devices under disaster conditions, it 
may not respond effectively to local leadership. In this regard, it 
must be stated that in most disaster-prone countries nowadays the 
development of self-reliance at community level, and the importance 
of good local leadership, are well recognized as desirable disaster 
management objectives.

22. 
It is also at community level that the inﬂuence of so-called “emergent 
leaders” is usually most felt. Such leaders, as the title implies, tend to be 
persons who stand out from within the community, or perhaps from within 
the lower echelons of organizations, and take the lead under crisis conditions. 
It is difﬁcult to generalize on the circumstances in which emergent leaders 
will assert their inﬂuence but obviously this is likely to happen when, 
for example:

• established leaders are put out of action, or
• groups of people are cut off from the rest of the community, or
• 

the recognized leadership system fails to respond adequately to a 
particular set of disaster conditions.

There are, of course, both advantages and disadvantages where emergent 
leadership is concerned. Sometimes it can be highly beneﬁcial in helping 
resolve problems at community level. At other times, it may exacerbate already 
difﬁcult situations through unreasonable criticism and “splinter” action.

For disaster managers generally, therefore, the emergent leader phenomenon 
is one which needs to be recognized and dealt with as best possible in relation 
to relevant circumstances.

23. 
In many cases, it has been found that legislation can help considerably 
in community leadership. By clearly laying down the responsibilities of local 
government and of the various counter-disaster organizations, such legislation 
reduces the possibility of confusion concerning community leadership and, 
over time, helps develop an accepted leadership structure.

Some Leadership Attributes and Desirabilities

24. As will be recognized from the foregoing paragraphs, there are many 
different aspects, conditions, and factors that inﬂuence leadership. Thus, 
when it comes to analyzing leadership—especially in terms of attributes and 

Leadership in Disaster 

121

desirabilities, many variations can apply. It follows that what is contained in 
this part of the chapter can therefore be no more than a basis of consideration. 
Ultimately, it must be up to individual disaster managers to adapt leadership 
principles, guidelines, and experience to their own circumstances.

25. 

Perhaps a start can be made by making two basic suggestions:

• First, it is not possible to “learn” leadership by memorizing 
and applying certain facts. We cannot, for example, “learn” 
courage, which most people would regard as a worthy and useful 
leadership quality.

• Second, only very few people can be classiﬁed as ideal, all-around 
leaders. At the same time, however, most of us do have some useful 
leadership qualities.

If one accepts that the above suggestions are reasonable, it tends to indicate 
that there is limited merit in trying to judge leaders or potential leaders 
in terms of personal qualities alone. The latter process is sometimes done 
against a list of desirabilities such as courage, dedication, enthusiasm, sense 
of humour, endurance, cheerfulness, and so on. This sort of process is bound 
to end in disillusionment, since few if any individuals are likely to meet such 
a speciﬁcation. Therefore, while personal qualities undoubtedly play an 
important part in leadership capability, it seems prudent to look for other 
aspects as well. The following might therefore form a possible combination of 
desirable objectives for leadership in disaster management.

• Personal qualities

To try to identify one’s own personal leadership qualities and, where 
possible, develop and expand them to best capability.

• Professional competence

To aim to develop high standards of knowledge, skill, and ability 
appropriate to tasks and circumstances. Essentially—and especially 
applicable to the disaster management role—this competence 
means knowing what to do and how to do it. Such competence is 
highly important because it inspires respect and trust in the leader.
 Self-conﬁdence
In many ways, though not necessarily entirely, self-conﬁdence stems 
from professional competence; because someone who is competent 
in a task must be justiﬁably conﬁdent to carry out that task. Again, 
this reﬂects on the leader’s status and stature.

• 

• Sound judgement

This tends naturally to develop from the combination of 
professional competence and self-conﬁdence. It is an enormously 

122 Disaster Management

strong leadership attribute because it brings out and consolidates 
trust from the team or organization. A leader with sound judgement 
is not likely to jeopardize colleagues.

• Accurate decision making

This, again, tends to be an outcome of foregoing qualities. It is 
obviously critical in committing a team or organization to a task. 
Moreover, as with sound judgement, it reﬂects on the relationship 
between the leader and the team particularly in terms of trust.

• Ability to communicate

The ability of a leader to communicate clearly and accurately with 
colleagues is another key leadership requirement. This applies not 
only when a team or organization is being committed to demanding 
and perhaps hazardous tasks; it also helps the leader transmit a 
sense of purpose and integrity.

• Personal example

It is important that the leader must set a personal example when this 
is required. There is little point in a leader having attributes such as 
those listed above unless he/she can play a part in tasks, when this 
becomes necessary, and to be seen as being able to do so.

• Appropriate style

Different tasks tend to require different leadership emphasis and 
characteristics. The adoption by a leader of an appropriate leadership 
style is obviously necessary especially because it reconciles that 
person with both the task and the team/organization. (Some brief 
comments on leadership styles are contained in paragraph 26.)

26. Leadership Styles

In examining leadership styles, gradations are sometimes used to 
illustrate variations that can apply between strong leader inﬂuence and strong 
team inﬂuence (sometimes called “boss-centered” and “subordinate-centered” 
inﬂuence). One example of this is given below.

Tells 

– The leader decides, tells the team, then expects the orders 

to be carried out without question.

Sells 

– The leader still decides, but recognizes some possibility of 
resistance and, therefore, takes care to “sell” the ideas to 
the team.

Consults – The leader asks for views from the team before deciding 
but the decisions are still those of the leader.

Joins 

– The leader puts the problem to the team and after discussion 

takes the majority decision.

Leadership in Disaster 

123

This type of gradation has sometimes been criticized on the grounds that 
a leader is there to lead and that, therefore, team inﬂuence should be only 
minimal. However, a case is known of a highly successful volunteer mountain 
rescue team in which all members were trained and qualiﬁed in the leadership 
role. The reason for this was that calls on the team were usually very urgent 
and—being volunteers—not all members were always immediately available. 
Therefore, any member had the capability of mobilizing the team and, if 
the leader or deputy were unavailable, could initiate a rescue mission. The 
team’s record of success clearly underlined the wisdom of this “multileader” 
system. It would seem, therefore, that disaster management authorities would 
be well advised to take an analytical approach to this and similar aspects 
of leadership.

27. Leadership and Training

Another useful factor in the development of disaster management 
leadership is the strong and positive link between leadership and training. If a 
team or organization is trained to very high standards, it will normally develop 
a high degree of professionalism. This, in turn, promotes an attitude of pride 
and strong esprit de corps. Leadership of such a team or organization does not 
usually present many problems.

Chapter 11

Organization

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to consider major aspects of disaster 

1. 
management organization.

The subject of organization has already been referred to in Chapter 4 on 

2. 
major requirements for coping with disaster.

3. 

Aspects covered in this chapter are:

• 
factors affecting disaster management organizational systems;
• organizational components, including emergency operations centers; and
• organizational structures.

Factors Affecting Organizational Systems

Certain factors that inﬂuence the establishment of organizational 

4. 
systems are set out in paragraphs 5–15 below.

5. 

A Key Objective

A key objective for any counter-disaster organization is that it should be 

capable of intervening rapidly and effectively in disaster situations.

6. 

The Disaster Threat

This is a fundamental consideration that basically determines the shape 
and size of the organizational system. Factors that need to be considered are 
the following:

• nature of the threat (in terms of natural disaster, man-made disaster, 

civil unrest, etc.);

• degree of the threat (whether it is severe, moderate, or slight); and
• pattern of the threat (in terms of frequency and extent).

126 Disaster Management

7. Government Policy

Government policy in relation to the threat will invariably have a strong 
inﬂuence on the broad national organizational framework. Such policy should 
be stated in one or all of the following documents:

• national disaster management policy statement;
• disaster legislation;
• national disaster plan; and
• 

some form of policy instruction concerning the establishment of a 
 counter-disaster organization.

It would be unusual for disaster management ofﬁcials to embark on the 
establishment of a counter-disaster organization without clear policy direction 
from the government.

It may be worth noting that in many cases, in practice, organizational structures 
have evolved from some form of planning base (e.g., a national plan, or even 
a number of provincial plans) in the absence of a national policy statement 
or disaster legislation. However, the establishment of an organizational 
system is undoubtedly more straightforward if there exists a policy statement 
and/or legislation.

It is also worth noting that modiﬁcations to the national organization pattern 
may be necessary at lower levels. There, modiﬁcations may arise because, 
for instance, some province/regions may be more disaster-prone than others, 
or for reasons of resource limitations, two or more government areas (e.g., 
municipalities) may have to combine to form a viable organizational entity.

The examples of existing disaster legislation, contained in Chapter 7, give 
some interesting insights into the interrelationship between government 
policy and organization.

8. Operational Requirements

The type of operations required, in response to the threat, will also 
have a direct bearing on the organizational system. For instance, in very 
ﬂood-prone areas there is often a requirement to establish special water-borne 
resources (e.g., ﬂood-boats for rescue and relief purposes). This, in turn, may 
require special organizational arrangements (including specialist stafﬁng and 
training). However, though such arrangements may require organizational 
modiﬁcations, they do not usually affect basic principles and structures.

Organization 

127

9. 

Availability of Resources

Whatever organizational framework is considered, it must ﬁt the 
resources that are likely to be available in terms of resource organizations 
(government and nongovernment), facilities, equipment, supplies, and 
personnel. An organizational framework that is too cumbersome and/or top-
heavy will obviously not achieve optimum effectiveness. The same applies if 
the framework is too small to handle the resources involved.

10. Deﬁnition of Responsibilities and Functions

A necessary prerequisite to the framing of a disaster management 
organization is that there should be clear deﬁnition of the responsibilities that 
the organization is required to cover and the functions it is to perform.

11. Use of Existing Structures and Organizations

As emphasized in Chapter 4, another important consideration is 
that the disaster management system should be an adjunct to the existing 
government structure. It should also be capable of maximizing the use of 
existing organizations (both government and nongovernment) for disaster-
related purposes.

12. Requirements for Direction and Management

The organizational system obviously needs to include arrangements for 
its own direction and management. This aspect is also relevant to paragraphs 
30–35 below, which are concerned with organizational structures. However, 
fundamental considerations are that there should normally be adequate 
provision for:

• policy direction from government;
• ministerial responsibility;
• a central body, responsible for implementing government policy 
and ensuring effective management during both nondisaster times 
and during a disaster itself. This usually consists of some form of 
national disaster council or national disaster committee;

• a small group responsible to the central body which, during response 
operations, undertakes the tasking of resource organizations, thus 
leaving the central body free to make policy decisions and determine 
priorities; and
relevant management arrangements within 
the government 
structure at lower levels that harmonize with arrangements made 
at the national level.

• 

128 Disaster Management

• Appropriate arrangements throughout the total system for handling 

 day-to-day disaster management affairs.

• Optimum coordination of counter-disaster effort.
• Community involvement and participation.

13. 

Incorporation of Organizational Components

All counter-disaster organizational systems need to contain and operate 
a number of different components, covering aspects such as warning, 
information management, and so on. The system therefore needs to be capable 
of incorporating these components covered in more detail in paragraphs 16–29.

14. Some Compromise Considerations

In many countries, ﬁnancial and other limitations may make it difﬁcult 
to have a separate specialist organization or department for counter-disaster 
purposes. It is more likely that counter-disaster requirements will have to be 
met by some system of departmental compromise, such as attaching a counter-
disaster section to an appropriate government department and using government 
(and nongovernment) resources in an optimum counter-disaster role.

Certain compromise considerations also tend to apply to the use of personnel. 
These indicate that whatever the circumstances, counter-disaster organization 
should be kept as straightforward as possible. There are two reasons for this:

• First, some parts of the organization (such as those primarily 
concerned with response operations) will be activated only when 
required. Thus, the simpler they are, the more easily they can 
be activated and the more readily the various functions can be 
remembered and performed by the persons concerned.

• Second, many of the personnel involved will have to be brought into 
the organization from other departments and agencies. Therefore, 
there is merit in ensuring that functions are kept as straightforward 
as possible.

15. Organizational Stress Factors

Any counter-disaster organization must obviously be capable of coping 
with the stresses and pressures of disaster events. It is therefore important that 
its components (e.g., communications, warning system, and facilities) should 

Organization 

129

function to the highest possible levels of efﬁciency and that they should be 
safeguarded, as far as possible, from disaster effects. It is also important that 
government and NGOs, most of which necessarily have to extend from their 
normal role into a counter-disaster role, should be organized so that they can 
cope with the additional disruptions, stresses, and pressures involved.

Organizational Components

16. The following components are likely to be necessary for the majority 
of counter-disaster organizations, though other components may need to 
be included in speciﬁc circumstances. The components are listed in brief 
format only to provide a reasonably concise checklist for disaster management 
ofﬁcials who may be tasked with establishing or reviewing a disaster-
related organization.

17. Facilities

Various facilities are needed to house emergency operations centers, 
communications sections, conference/brieﬁng rooms, ofﬁces, equipment stores 
and so on. In many countries, a dual-purpose approach is taken toward this 
aspect. For instance, suitable ofﬁce space can be speedily converted for use as 
an emergency operations center by having maps and skeleton display boards 
readily available (for presenting situation information, resources available, 
tasks with priorities, tasks being undertaken, etc.). Similarly, appropriate 
temporary conversion for disaster purposes can be made of police headquarters 
or military headquarters facilities. Obviously, however, custom-built facilities 
are preferable, provided their establishment and use is cost-effective.

18. Equipment and Supplies

Most disaster management organizations need to hold various categories 
of emergency equipment and supplies. These will vary according to individual 
requirements but usually the following need to be stored and maintained:

• vehicles;
• emergency equipment such as generators, emergency lighting sets, 
picks, shovels, tarpaulins, blankets, tents, and communications 
equipment; and
training equipment.

• 

130 Disaster Management

19. Trained Staff

Adequately trained staff must be available to perform all the functions 
that have been allotted to the disaster management organization. As indicated 
in paragraph 14, many of the staff involved in counter-disaster activities will 
necessarily have a part-time role only. Therefore, if the organization is to 
achieve the key objective of being able to intervene rapidly and effectively in 
disaster situations, it needs to be capable of ensuring that adequate training 
programs are maintained.

20. Communications

Without adequate and effective communications, no counter-
disaster organization is likely to function satisfactorily. As a notable military 
commander is reputed to have said, “Without communications, all I command 
is a mahogany desk. A mahogany desk is not an effective weapon of war.” In 
disaster management terms, four particularly important considerations apply 
to communications systems, in that:

• They must provide adequate facilities for the normal day-to-day 

functioning of the organization.

• They must be capable of extending from the day-to-day role into 
the wider and more demanding functions of response operations.

• They must, when necessary, provide a mobile capability.
• They must have adequate reserve or back-up capacity to meet 

emergency demands.

Sometimes, because of ﬁnancial and other constraints, it is not possible to 
provide a special communications facility to fulﬁll the above needs. Therefore, 
this may mean using the most proﬁcient available network (e.g., a police 
communications system) and supporting this with other networks for backup 
or standby emergency purposes. Existing regular broadcasting systems are 
also invaluable for disseminating disaster-related information.

It is usual and effective to coordinate the capabilities of available communi-
cations networks under relevant disaster plans, so that these can be readily 
called upon by disaster management ofﬁcials as required. (See also Chapter 
12 on plans).

21. Warning Systems

The effectiveness of warning systems is one of the most critical 
components in any nation’s capability to deal with disaster. This requirement 

therefore needs to be adequately covered within all organizational systems at 
all levels. The following are key requirements in warning systems:

Organization 

131

• Capability to receive international warning

For example, warning of developing cyclones under international 
meteorological arrangements or tsunami warnings from designated 
international centers.

• Capability to initiate in-country warning

For example, in cases such as volcanic eruption, ﬂood, landslide, 
ﬁre, and hazardous chemical incident.

• Capability to transmit warning from national and other levels

For example, by radio broadcast, television, or special warning 
systems.

• Capability to disseminate warning at local community level

For example, by loud hailer, siren, warning pennant, bells, or 
messenger if circumstances so demand.
• Capability to receive warning and act upon it

This requires possession of or access to a radio/television receiver, 
being in hearing/seeing distance of signals, knowing what the 
various warnings mean, and knowing what to do.

If there are limitations or disruptions to any of these capabilities, warning 
is unlikely to be totally effective. Most limitations or disruptions are caused 
by disaster events themselves; for example, the inability of a radio broadcast 
system to function due to cyclone, earthquake, or other damage.

In situations where there is no advance warning (e.g., earthquake or explosion), 
the counter-disaster organization is at a disadvantage in terms of readiness to 
respond. Alerting and activation arrangements that are contained in relevant 
plans and operating procedures need to cater for this eventuality as far 
as possible.

22. 

Information Management

The importance of information in coping with disaster situations cannot 
be overemphasized. Even the best possible organizational system, manned by 
the most professional and expert staff, is virtually useless without relevant 
information and the means of processing it.

The quality of information is also of key importance. Information must be 
accurate and it must be up-to-date. Otherwise, response will not be timely and 
it will not be directed to critical areas in the right order of priority.

132 Disaster Management

Sources of information also need to be considered carefully to provide two 
main information categories, namely:

• Crisis information – the various forms of information that apply 
directly to a particular disaster situation. This includes weather 
reports, damage reports, situation updates, and so on. It is dynamic 
information, directly related to the ongoing event.

• Background information – records of previous disasters, map 
information, census information, and so on. This is static information 
but, in its way, it may be just as important as crisis information.

Organizationally, therefore, the need is to ensure that adequate arrangements 
exist for the acquisition of crisis information and that background information 
can be readily accessed for use as required.

Information processing tends invariably to be geared to the simple disaster 
information cycle of:

information,

• 
• assessment (or evaluation),
• decision making, and
• dissemination of information and decisions.

It is also important that the information processing system ensures that 
information is distributed not only vertically through the organization but 
horizontally as well. This simple point may sometimes be overlooked.

For effective operation of the disaster information cycle, certain organizational 
facilities and capabilities are necessary. These include:

• emergency operations center (static and mobile);
• good communications;
• capability for survey and assessment;
• 

facilities to acquire, transmit, receive, display, collate, assess, store, 
and generally handle information;

• provision for presenting information in such a way that it can 

facilitate decision making; and
trained staff to operate the information management system.

• 

Overall, in considering relevant organizational aspects, it is important to bear 
in mind that the main purpose of information acquisition and processing is 
that it must enable disaster management ofﬁcials to identify, prioritize, and 
allocate response tasks.

Organization 

133

23. Liaison Facilities

Most organizational systems need to include facilities for liaison with 
various interrelated agencies. The precise nature of these facilities and the 
channels used will usually need to be decided based on individual situations. 
However, possible examples are:

• Liaison necessary to incorporate NGOs into a national counter-disaster 

system
Many governments prefer to effect liaison with NGOs on a group 
basis where NGOs form themselves into some form of support 
organization and, in principle, liaise with government, as a group, 
through deﬁned channels. For day-to-day matters, this could be 
through an NDMO; and during disaster operations, through a 
central government tasking group. Channels for this type of liaison 
obviously need to be clearly deﬁned in relevant plans.

• Liaison necessary for requesting and providing international assistance

Channels for this liaison, again, need to be clearly deﬁned if 
international assistance is to be timely and effective. Liaison needs 
to be ongoing in nondisaster times as well as during disaster 
events. Usually, this type of liaison involves the Department of 
Foreign Affairs but it is important that the NDC or its equivalent 
can establish and maintain clear and rapid contact with sources of 
assistance, as and when necessary. As with the NGO liaison quoted 
above, arrangements need to be outlined in relevant plans.

24. Media and Public Relations

Organizational facilities are also required to ensure a sound relationship 
with the media and for public relations generally. There are two important 
aspects of relationship with the media.

• First, the media needs information for its own news purposes and, 
in times of disaster, it is usually in everyone’s interest that such 
information should be accurate. Otherwise, all sorts of repercussions 
can arise, some of which may exacerbate an already disruptive 
situation.

• Second, the media can be a valuable disaster management resource, 
given its capability to disseminate ofﬁcial information and guidance 
to affected communities and others.

Good public relations in the general sense also constitute a useful asset for 
disaster management authorities. This applies especially to the development of 

134 Disaster Management

public awareness, and thus to the constructive involvement and participation 
of the public in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery.

25. Mobile Facilities

The very nature of disaster, particularly its propensity for disrupting 
existing facilities within affected areas, demands a strong concept of mobility 
in the application of countermeasures. Therefore, mobile emergency operations 
centers, mobile welfare facilities, and mobility in such activities as evacuation 
and survey and assessment need to be fully catered for in organizational terms.

26. Alerting, Activation, and Stand-Down

Organizational arrangements are necessary for alerting, activation, and 
stand-down of the disaster management system. These arrangements are 
usually contained in counter-disaster plans including departmental operational 
procedures—possibly in stages—as follows:

• Stage 1 - Readiness,
• Stage 2 - Standby,
• Stage 3 - Action, and
• Stage 4 - Stand-down.

See Chapter 12 on plans for details of these stages.

27. Administrative Requirements

 Counter-disaster plans make heavy demands on administrative 
support. The scale of logistic and administrative backing required for response 
aspects such as debris clearance, survey and assessment, distribution of relief 
supplies, and repairs to essential services can be readily appreciated. However, 
administrative requirements in nondisaster times are equally important, 
particularly if aspects of preparedness, training, and public awareness are to be 
maintained at necessary levels of effectiveness. Moreover, day-to-day matters 
of disaster management must be prioritized if a counter-disaster organization 
is to function satisfactorily.

28. Emergency Operations Centers

Virtually all the organizational components outlined above have a direct 
relationship with the establishment and functions of emergency operations 

centers. An EOC is the nerve center for dealing with a disaster situation. It 
brings together the vital aspects of:

Organization 

135

situation assessment and monitoring,

• communications,
• 
information,
• warning,
• 
• action priorities,
• 
• coordination of effort, and
• media and public information.

tasking allocations,

In other words, the EOC constitutes the headquarters or focal control point 
through which the implementation of a counter-disaster plan is directed and 
coordinated.

In setting up an EOC, the main considerations are:

• adequate communications facilities with a message center;
• arrangements for receiving, collating and assessing information, 

and for facilitating decision making;

• display facilities (e.g., maps and wall facilities) for presenting an 
“information picture” of the disaster situation, resources available, 
tasks being undertaken, tasks needing to be undertaken, etc;

• 

• working space (with desks, seating, etc.) for EOC ofﬁcials;
• conference/brieﬁng room(s) for brieﬁng ministers and other 
important persons, and for progress meetings and discussions;
information room (preferably separate from the main EOC) for brieﬁng 
media representatives and releasing information to the public;
rest facilities for staff; and

• 
• other aspects, such as storage space, vehicle access and parking 
facilities, emergency power supplies, and any other requirements to 
meet speciﬁc circumstance).

Other key points concerning EOCs are:

• 

It is important that the EOC can be activated at short notice and 
that designated staff can be readily alerted and mobilized.

• The EOC building must be clearly identiﬁable.
• The EOC should be periodically checked for serviceability and 

readiness.

• Alternative EOCs should be earmarked for use if required.

136 Disaster Management

• The tasks and therefore the desk assignments to be carried out in 
the EOC tend to vary with differing disaster circumstances. This 
means that designated EOC staff need to come from a wide range of 
departments in order that action desks can be manned as required 
by the particular disaster situation.

• One useful way of covering the foregoing manning requirement is to 
have a roster of disaster services liaison ofﬁcers (DSLOs) nominated 
by departments. These DSLOs can then undergo periodic brieﬁng 
and participation in EOC exercises so that they are ready to 
undertake their duties any time.

29. Example of EOC Desk Assignments

The following is an example of the desk assignments and responsibilities 
which might be applied to an EOC. It is emphasized that this is for purposes of 
illustration only and that, in reality, desk assignment and responsibilities would 
need to be formulated according to the needs of the particular situation.

Controller
 Responsible for the overall direction and coordination of activities 
undertaken by the EOC. (The Controller would probably be a member 
of the Central Control Group (CCG) or similar tasking organization, 
and would implement decisions made by that group in accordance 
with the policy direction of the NDC).

Agriculture
• Collation and assessment of crop damage reports; 
• Conservation of produce from damaged crops;
• 
• Advice and assistance to producers; and
• Preparations for interim crop production.

Immediate rehabilitation measures for agriculture;

Commerce
• Liaison with commercial and industrial agencies;
• Location of supplies for emergency government purchase; and
• Monitoring of prices and effects of disaster on local markets.

Construction
• Clearance of debris, especially for access and movement;
• Emergency repairs to key facilities (e.g., roads, wharves, and airﬁelds);
• Emergency construction (e.g., temporary shelter, provision of 

tentage for homeless groups);

• Repairs to government buildings, for essential purposes;

Organization 

137

Information;

• Repairs to housing;
• 
• Collation for information;
• Maintenance of information displays in EOC;
• Dissemination of information, as directed by controller;
• Acquisition of additional information, as required; and
• Media and public relations.

Medical and Health
• Management coordination for handling injured and sick persons;
• Preventive health measures;
• Policy deployment of medical teams;
• Policy distribution of medical supplies; and
• Coordination of inspection of food and water supplies.

Services
• Restoration of essential services: including power, water, and 

communications; and

• Direction of special resources to provide services, such as water 

puriﬁcation plant.

Administration
Accounting, including:
• Relief donations from in-country and overseas;
• Management of national disaster relief fund;
• Government purchases of in-country emergency supplies;
• Clerical procedures; 
• Record keeping, for all relevant stores and other items; and
• Handling of immediate claims from public.

Supplies
• Monitoring of requirements for emergency supplies (e.g., food, 

shelter materials, medical supplies);

• Registration of available emergency supplies;
• Arrangement of priorities for distribution of emergency supplies as 

directed by NDC; and

• Coordination with transport desk of transport and distribution of 

emergency supplies.

Transport
• Coordination of use of available transport facilities with transport 

requirements.

• Distribution of emergency supplies and other commodities.

138 Disaster Management

NGO Liaison
• Coordination of NGO activities.

International Assistance
 International assistance can be coordinated in several ways. One useful 
option is for international assistance elements to be channelled through 
the controller and then dealt with in detail by the appropriate desk; 
for example, the employment of international medical teams would be 
dealt with by the controller and the medical and health desk.

Organizational Structures

30. 
In this section of the chapter, factors that inﬂuence the shape and 
nature of organizational structures which are necessary to cope with disaster 
are considered.

31. Basic Considerations

The following factors are fundamental to determining organizational 

structures and need to be considered as a ﬁrst step.

• The physical and geographical nature of the country. For instance, 
distance alone can be an important factor, as can the multi-island 
conﬁguration of a country.

• The nature, extent, and severity of the disaster threat, and the broad 
requirements which these pose in disaster management terms.
• Any formal directions that may have been issued by government 
concerning disaster management; for instance, legislation or policy 
statements.

• A broad concept of the scope of activity to be covered by the 
organizational structure needs to be deﬁned; for instance, whether 
it is to cover all aspects of the disaster management cycle or only 
certain parts of it.

• Similarly, a general deﬁnition needs to be made of the levels of government 

structure that will constitute major segments of the structure.

• A general assessment should also be made of the need for and the 
value and practicability of decentralization. For instance, effective 
decentralization is a valuable asset if major parts of the organizational 
structure are put out of action by disaster impact.

32. 

Identiﬁcation of Key Government Level

It is useful to identify, at an early stage in the examination and planning 
process, what might be termed the key government level—that is, the level 

Organization 

139

within the normal government structure which is the most important for 
applying disaster management action. This level can vary, depending on 
individual national circumstances. For instance, in a small country, the key 
level will invariably be the national level. This is the level from which the 
main management of normal government affairs is exercised and, therefore, 
it best ﬁts overall disaster management. However, in very large countries it is 
preferable to use a state, regional, or provincial level as the key one for disaster 
management because this tends to be the level from which normal day-to-day 
government is most actively managed. In fact, because of distance and other 
factors, it would be impossible to manage disaster response operations from 
national level.

33. Establishment of Requirements at Various Levels of

Government

Having selected the key level of government, the next step is to establish, 
in general terms, the main disaster management requirements which should 
apply at the various levels of government, for instance, at national, state, 
regional, and local levels.

34. 

Integration of Organizational and Functional Factors

It is then possible to integrate:

• Functional factors (disaster management tasks that have to be done) 

with

• Organizational factors (management framework and facilities 

needed to carry out the disaster management tasks).

This process leads, in a fairly simple and straightforward way, to the 
formulation of an appropriate organizational “family tree” as shown in the 
following diagrams. (also reproduced in Chapter 4) shows the major 
areas of functional responsibility in a disaster management system. 
shows a possible structural framework for a large country.

140 Disaster Management

: Disaster Management System Organizational 
and Functional Diagram

CABINET

National Disaster 
Council

International 
Assistance

National Disaster 
Management Office

PREPAREDNESS

RESPONSE

RECOVERY

Government 
Departments/ 
NGOs

Provincial 
Disaster 
Committees

Local 
Government 
Committees

Operations 
Control Group

National Emergency 
Operations Center

Government 
Departments/NGOs

Technical 
Advisory 
Team

Government 
Departments/ 
NGOs

Provincial 
Disaster 
Committees

Provincial 
Disaster 
Committees

Local 
Local 
Government 
Government 
Committees
Committees

COMMUNITIES
COMMUNITIES

DISASTER AREAS

DISASTER AREAS

RECOVERY PROGRAMS
RECOVERY PROGRAMS

NGO = nongovernment organization

Organization 

141

: Outline of a Possible Organizational Framework 
for a Large Country

NATIONAL DISASTER COUNCIL

NEOC

Coordination,
Communication,
Information, and
Assistance.

Departments,
NGOs,
Media,
International
agencies,

Other

resources, etc.

* * * *PROVINCIAL DISASTER COMMITTEE

EOC

* * * * * * * * * * * 

MUNICIPAL DISASTER COMMITTEE

EOC

Disaster front 
Task force teams 
Self-help teams

= Direction/Coordination

= Liaison/Support/Assistance

* * * * * *

= Key Government Level

EOC = emergency operations center, NEOC = national emergency operations 
center, NGO = nongoverment organization.

142 Disaster Management

35. Some Major Responsibilities

As a further guideline, the responsibilities which attach to some of the 
major structural components are summarized below. These and associated 
responsibilities need to be clearly stated in relevant counter-disaster plans.

• National government responsibility

Overall national responsibility for all disaster-related matters rests 
with Cabinet.

• Ministerial authority

Ministerial authority is vested in the minister [for Home Affairs] 
who is directly responsible to Cabinet for ensuring that adequate 
disaster management measures exist at all times.
In some cases, this ministerial authority is vested in a small 
ministerial committee of, say, three members.

• NDC

Responsible to the minister (or ministerial committee) for 
coordinating and directing all disaster-related matters which are 
concerned with planning, organization, prevention, mitigating, 
preparedness, response, recovery, training, public awareness, 
and other appropriate aspects. (The precise responsibilities can 
vary with circumstances; for instance, the NDC may have limited 
responsibilities for recovery, which may be dealt with by a separate 
committee). The council usually consists of a number of heads 
of departments (e.g., those departments most directly concerned 
with dealing with disaster such as public works, police, transport, 
communications, medical and health, foreign affairs), with wide 
power to coopt other members as necessary.
NDC can also appoint special bodies, such as task forces. While it is 
desirable, especially in the interests of timely decision making, that 
the council should be kept small, it is usually found that in the initial 
stages of a disaster, it is necessary to call upon coopted members 
from a fairly wide range of departments and agencies.

• Operations Control Group (or Central Control Group)

Responsible to the NDC for coordination and direction of response 
operations, including the tasking of resource organizations. The 
group usually consists of three or four members, for instance:

- assistant commissioner of police (operations),
- chief marine ofﬁcer, and
- controller of civil aviation.

Organization 

143

Apart from their group responsibilities, these ofﬁcials carry out the 
duties of controller, NEOC.

• NDMO

Responsible to NDC for carrying out day-to-day disaster management 
responsibilities, as directed by the chair of the NDC.
NDMO is usually required to undertake a wide range of 
responsibilities and it is convenient to include these in an annex to 
the national disaster plan so that they are available for reference by 
all concerned.

• Provincial Disaster Committee

Usually, these committees will mirror the NDC in both membership 
and role. However, where the province constitutes the key 
government level, the committee would probably be under the 
chairpersonship of the governor or chief minister of the province.

• Government Departments

Government departments and agencies play key roles in coping 
with disaster. Therefore, it is important that their responsibilities 
are clearly laid down. This is best done in department operations 
procedures.

Chapter 12

Plans

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the main considerations which 

1. 
apply to the formulation and use of counter-disaster plans.

Certain aspects relating to plans are contained in Chapter 4 and, for 

2. 
ease of reference, these are summarized in paragraph 4 below.

3. 

Aspects covered in this chapter are:

• Reiteration of the need for counter-disaster plans;
• Some general considerations which apply to planning:

the purpose of planning,

– 
– planning and the disaster management cycle,
– 
– 

levels of plans and differing requirements, and
the format of plans.

• The planning process;
• Critical areas in planning;
• Aspects that need to be considered during planning; and
• A suggested outline for a main action plan.

Summary of aspects are covered in Chapter 4.

Some aspects concerning plans were included in Chapter 4. They are 

4. 
summarized below:

• The need for counter-disaster plans has been well illustrated 
internationally, the indications being that where plans did not exist, 
nations suffered more seriously than would otherwise have been 
the case. Also, an effective basis of planning and the maintenance 
of relevant plans reﬂects wide beneﬁts throughout other aspects of 
disaster management.

• Certain pitfalls can apply to planning, They include;

– plans becoming outdated and therefore inapplicable;

 
 
 
 
 
146 Disaster Management

– plans being nominalistic and therefore irrelevant; and
– 

 plans becoming inapplicable due to changes in government 
organization or similar causes.

• There are several other areas of planning that can prove critical 
when plans are implemented in response to disaster; these 
include information management, coordination, and survey and 
assessment.

The Need for Counter-Disaster Plans

The need for counter-disaster plans, already emphasized in Chapter 4 

5. 
is reiterated here in the form of two simple quotations.

• The ﬁrst quotation, already stated in Chapter 4, refers to a disaster 
which occurred in 1987 and reads as follows: “When we look back 
on the cyclone and what it did to our country, there is no doubt 
that hundreds of people are alive here today because we had proper 
disaster plans.”

• The second quotation refers to a disaster which occurred in early 
1990. It reads: “A severe cyclone struck the province. UNDRO 
reports that whilst this cyclone was more severe than the one in 
1977, which killed 10,000 people in the same area, casualties are 
less because of timely warnings and an evacuation campaign.”

Some General Considerations Applicable to Planning

6. 

The Purpose of Planning

The purpose of planning is to anticipate future situations and 
requirements, thus ensuring the application of effective and coordinated 
countermeasures. It is suggested that this is a useful deﬁnition for disaster 
management ofﬁcials because it indicates the wide nature of and requirements 
for counter-disaster planning. In other words, planning should not be conﬁned 
merely to preparedness for and response to speciﬁc disaster events; it should 
cater, as far as possible, for the whole scope of the disaster management cycle, 
as outlined in the following paragraph.

7. 

Planning and the Disaster Management Cycle

Consideration of planning requirements in relation to the disaster 
management cycle throws some interesting light on (among other things) the 
need for ﬂexibility of approach.

 
 
Plans 

147

National development
 Most countries nowadays gear national development to a series of 
 time-period plans; for example, 5-year plans. The obvious merit of this 
kind of system is that it provides considerable ﬂexibility for adjustment 
to unscheduled or unexpected events; for example, such things as 
nationwide failure of a vital export crop or unanticipated effects of 
world ﬁnancial systems. This ﬂexibility is, of course, also appropriate for 
adjusting to the effects of disaster. Thus, many nations include disaster 
aspects in their planning cycles. There is also the point that management 
of the environment rates highly in modern national considerations. 
Therefore, since many disaster events are environmentally related, there 
is a strong case for linking disaster and the environment where national 
planning is concerned. Consequently, a planning key point is that, 
where appropriate, disaster should be linked with the environment and 
included in national development plans.

Prevention
 Not all countries use the category of prevention on its own, preferring 
the combined term of prevention/mitigation.

 As indicated in Chapter 5, the possible range of preventive measures 
could be quite wide. At one end of the prevention range, the construction 
of ﬂood control structures could involve extensive effort and very large 
amounts of money. For instance, ﬂood barriers built in England over 
recent years to protect the city of London cost some 700 million pounds 
(or approximately 1,173 million US dollars). With regard to deﬁnitions, 
it is interesting to note that the system is ofﬁcially described as being 
designed to prevent potentially disastrous ﬂooding over more than one 
third of the capital city area.

 At the other end of the prevention range, controlled burning off in 
forest areas, prior to a high-risk season, to prevent ﬁres from starting, 
comes closer to mitigation or even preparedness.

 Planning for these different contingencies therefore tends to fall into 
differing categories. For instance:

• A complex and costly ﬂood prevention system, as quoted above, 
could reasonably be expected to come within the category of 
national development.

• However, controlled burning off would be more likely to fall within 
a speciﬁc annual disaster management program, which could 
also be usefully included (for reference purposes), in a disaster 
preparedness/response plan.

148 Disaster Management

Mitigation
 If the term mitigation, or prevention/mitigation is taken as mainly 
including structural and nonstructural measures designed to reduce the 
effects of disasters when they occur, it would seem appropriate for such 
measures to be applied as a series of programs or regulations, rather 
than as plans. For instance, aspects such as building codes, land-use 
regulations and safety codes for transport systems would appear to ﬁt 
more appropriate into a program or regulation category.

 However, as with measures of prevention, it would also be reasonable 
to include appropriate references in disaster preparedness/response 
plans. For example, the fact that wind-resistant factors had been built 
into domestic houses would have some bearing on disaster response 
management decisions relating to possible evacuation or temporary 
movement to safe havens.

Preparedness/response
 The combined categories of preparedness and response tend generally to 
constitute the most widely used basis for counter-disaster plans, especially 
those which might be called action plans. This is understandable 
because so much of response effectiveness obviously depends on good 
preparedness. Moreover, the use of a plan for these purposes appears well 
justiﬁed by the Oxford Dictionary deﬁnition that a plan is a formulated 
organized method by which things are to be done.

 In some cases, the preparedness/response plan is called the (national or 
state) disaster response plan, as distinct from a separate plan designed 
to deal with recovery (see comments below concerning recovery).

Recovery
 There are various planning options that can be used for recovery. 
Sometimes a separate plan is utilized so that two main plans exist, a 
disaster response plan and a disaster recovery plan.

 However, some nations prefer to take a more ﬂexible approach and deal 
with recovery through arrangements which, depending on circumstances, 
are speciﬁc to each disaster event. For instance, recovery matters might 
be handled by a small ministerial committee.

 If arrangements for recovery are left ﬂexible in this way, it is useful 
to include a small section in the disaster response plan to this effect. 
There should also be an instruction in the disaster response plan that is 
aimed at ensuring that, during the response stage, adequate records are 

Plans 

149

kept for post-disaster review and recovery program purposes. In other 
words, it is essential to interlock response and recovery plans/programs 
in such a way that both these sections of the disaster management cycle 
are adequately and effectively processed.

8. 

Levels of Plans and Differing Requirements

As indicated in the foregoing paragraph, the different parts of the 
disaster management cycle generate different planning requirements. In 
a similar way, levels of plans produce other requirements, as the following 
examples illustrate.

National level
 As stated in Chapter 11 on organization, it is not usually practicable to 
manage disasters directly from a national level in a very large country 
because of distance and other factors. In this case, the plan (or section 
of the plan) which applies to the national level is likely to be broadly 
concerned with coordination, mobilization, and deployment of national 
resources, requests for international assistance, and so on, rather than 
detailed management action.

 If, however, the country is small and detailed government business 
can be largely managed from national level, then the national disaster 
plan is likely to be the main action plan. Therefore, the plan will need 
a broad scope, ranging from some policy matters down to detailed 
action requirements.

 These aspects of national level planning need careful attention when 
plans are being initiated, or when they are being reviewed/revised.

Intermediate level
 In most cases, the plan at intermediate government level will fall into 
one or two broad categories.

• 

If the national plan is the main action plan (i.e., for a small country), the 
plan at intermediate level will tend to be more concerned with local 
implementation measures (e.g., on-ground survey and assessment 
and detailed relief), rather than major decision making (this latter 
being the responsibility of national level).

The intermediate plan will therefore tend to be a smaller projection 
of the national plan. In such cases, especially in the interests of 
standardization, it is appropriate for the national government to 

 
150 Disaster Management

require that intermediate (say, provincial) plans are formulated to 
a speciﬁed common format. Sometimes a planning guide is issued 
for this purpose. The actual writing of the intermediate plan then 
conforms to a set of guidelines and production of the plan is 
relatively easy and straightforward.

• 

If, alternatively, the intermediate level plan constitutes the main 
action plan, it will obviously need to be more comprehensive and 
autonomous than in the circumstances described immediately 
above. This will particularly apply to aspects such as warning, 
information management, decision making and control, and 
 coordination capability.

Community or local level
 At community or local level, plans obviously tend to cover a range of 
detailed countermeasures. One main requirement of the local plan is, 
therefore, to coordinate the activities of various existing services (e.g., 
police, ﬁre brigade, ambulance service, and voluntary organizations). 
Similarly, the plan needs to facilitate the participation of self-help groups 
and community members, especially where this encourages the use of 
traditional knowledge and skill, plus previous disaster-related experience. 
It is signiﬁcant that international experience, in both developing and 
developed countries, underlines the need for and immense value of 
appropriate plans and procedures at local level.

The Format of Plans

9. 
There is no rigid or standard format for counter-disaster plans. The 
reverse applies such that the format needs to ﬁt the circumstances in which the 
plan is being made and the requirements which it is designed to meet. However, 
certain common features tend to apply to most plans. These include:

Clarity of aim
 The aim needs to be carefully and accurately selected because it 
determines the whole thrust and scope of the plan. All information, 
directions, and instructions included in the plan then need to be in line 
with the aim.

Realism
 The plan must be realistic such that it relates to an accurate assessment 
of the disaster threat and considers the scale and capability of available 
counter-disaster resources.

Plans 

151

Level of the plan
 The plan must also be accurately related to the level with which it is 
concerned (see paragraph 8).

Flexibility
 Because disaster circumstances tend to vary and not necessarily follow 
set patterns, counter-disaster plans need to be ﬂexible. Flexibility is best 
achieved by planning to cope with the full range of possible disaster 
threats and ensuring that, within plans, response arrangements can 
be rapidly adapted to new and changing circumstances. Planned 
decentralization, where appropriate, is a useful adjunct toward 
achieving ﬂexibility.

 Coordination
 Since coordination of effort is a key factor in counter-disaster activities, 
the plan should include the optimum system for direction/coordination. 
All arrangements covered by the plan should be made with the 
coordination factor in mind.

 Deﬁnition of responsibility
 It is critically important that responsibilities are clearly deﬁned in plans. 
This reduces, to a minimum, the possibility of misunderstandings, 
duplications, and omissions in the various activities which the plan 
covers. It is equally important that responsibilities be clearly deﬁned 
because it signiﬁcantly helps in achieving coordination of effort.

Ease of use
 The plan should be formulated in such a way that it is easy to use. 
References within the plan should be clear and readily identiﬁable. Also, 
the body of the plan needs to be clear and concise as possible, with 
annexes being used for very detailed information.

Plan components
 There are a number of options for dividing the plan into sections or 
components. One way is to have:

• A main plan or main action plan that contains the primary parts of 
the plan, such as the threat, the main requirements for dealing with 
the threat, resources, organization, direction and coordination, 
warning, operational implementation of the plan, counter-disaster 
operations, recovery policy, post-disaster review, etc.

 
152 Disaster Management

• 

 Sub-plans are part of the main plan but which may be required to 
amplify parts of the main plan that need special consideration (e.g., 
welfare, evacuation, public information, and so on).

• Special plans may be required to deal with special contingencies such 
as an outbreak of an exotic animal disease, which would require 
specialist personnel and procedures. Such special plans would 
normally be designed to work in harmony with the main plan and 
use the overall counter-disaster organization as necessary.

 See also the appendix to this chapter which contains a possible outline 
for a main action plan.

Viability
 The plan should include arrangements for periodically checking that it is 
kept up-to-date and fully viable for the purpose for which it is designed.

Checkpoints
It is widely accepted that a counter-disaster plan should be:
 written – or it will not be remembered,
simple – or it will not be understood,
disseminated – or it will not be in the hands of those who need it,
tested – or it will not be practical, and
revised – or it will not be up-to-date.

The Planning Process

10. The process of producing a counter-disaster plan should never be 
regarded as one in which some specialist or team acts in isolation. The planning 
process needs to be action-oriented, to involve a wide range of people and 
organizations, and to produce a result which has the agreement and support 
of all involved.

Some reference points which are applicable to the revision, as well as 

11. 
initial drafting of plans are as follows:

• 

It is vitally important, throughout the planning process, to keep 
the aim of the plan clear. After the aim has been initially drafted, it 
is useful to refer it for conﬁrmation to the minister (or ministerial 
committee) concerned, together with any major planning guidelines 
which may apply. This conﬁrmation then provides an ofﬁcial basis 
on which to proceed for drafting purposes. It is also useful during 
drafting to refer back occasionally to the minister (or committee) to 

 
 
 
 
Plans 

153

• 

• 

keep the latter informed of progress and/or to raise any points on 
which further guidance is necessary.
It is also important, at an early stage in planning and prior to 
detailed discussions, to circulate a memorandum to all departments 
and organizations involved. This memorandum should clearly 
state the aim of the plan, general outline of the planning program, 
and anticipated time scale leading up to government approval of 
the plan.
It should be remembered, at all times, that planning is a cooperative 
process. All concerned must be fully consulted, particularly to ensure 
that mutual agreement is reached on responsibilities designated 
within the plan. This consultative process is best carried out, from 
both a practical and psychological viewpoint, by the planners going 
to see the key individuals concerned, not vice versa.

• After agreeing on responsibilities and undertakings, it is useful if 
the planners submit to the department or organization concerned a 
written draft of the proposed input into the plan for conﬁrmation.
• As already stated, there is no rigid format for plans. Therefore, 
particularly during the consultative process, the planners should 
develop a good idea of what format is eventually going to be best 
suited for ﬁtting together the various resource organizations and 
other components which make up the plan.

• During drafting, it should be remembered that the plan must be easy 
to use. In this regard, the appropriate use of annexes is essential. Also, 
sections and paragraphs within the plan should be numbered so that 
there is no possibility of misreference. In most instances, the plan 
will be used under difﬁcult disaster circumstances when, perhaps, 
communications are adversely affected; therefore, everything 
possible should be done during planning to assist the user.

• Whether the plan should be in a loose-leaf form or otherwise should 
be considered. The views of experienced disaster management 
ofﬁcials sometimes differ signiﬁcantly on this point. However, from a 
planning point of view, it should be up to the planners (in consultation 
with the potential users) to resolve this question satisfactorily.

• How planning progress is to be monitored is also a matter for 
individual circumstances. One useful method is for the planners, 
after their initial consultative discussions, to submit a draft outline 
of the plan to, say, the NDC (acting on behalf of the minister). NDC 
can then give an overall direction on the general scope and shape of 
the plan. Subsequently, the planners can draft sections of the plan 
in detail and arrange periodic progress meetings with the council. 
This process is useful because it directly involves the council (as 

154 Disaster Management

a senior decision-making body) and helps ensure that, for all 
concerned, redrafting is progressive. This avoids drastic revisions 
when the draft plan is eventually completed.

• Again depending on circumstances, when the ﬁnal draft is 
complete, the minister and/or NDC may deem it appropriate to 
circulate copies to the departments and agencies concerned for ﬁnal 
checking. However, in many cases, this ﬁnal checking process can 
be adequately covered if the draft plan is circulated to ministers (and 
therefore heads of departments) well in advance of consideration by 
cabinet.

• 

• The planning process and the plan itself should include provisions 
for legal authorization, thus making the plan a lawful instrument of 
government. It is recommended that this should be done whether 
or not disaster legislation exists. The ﬁnal decision on this point 
depends, of course, on national circumstances.
It is worth bearing in mind that planning does not stop once the 
plan has been ﬁnalized and approved. In fact, it is certain that if 
the plan does not receive constant attention it will rapidly fall out 
of date. Thus it will be useless, or next to useless when it is next 
required. In any case the plan, if it is to remain viable, will require 
ongoing correlated action. For instance, it is necessary to test the 
plan, or various parts of it, from time to time. Also, facilities such as 
EOCs require periodic readiness and functional checks. Similarly, 
important support aspects, such as training and public awareness, 
need to be kept active. If, in this way, the plan becomes recognised as 
the focus of disaster management, its viability will be maintained (see 
also paragraph 20 below for further points concerning viability).

Critical Areas in Planning

12. As stated in paragraph 4 above, certain pitfalls can apply to planning and 
the following have already been cited:

• Plans become outdated and therefore ineffective.
• Plans can be nominalistic and therefore lack relevance.
• Plans can become inappropriate due to changes in government 

organization or similar causes.

13. In addition to this kind of pitfall, there are also various critical areas which 
need to be counteracted as far as possible. These are outlined subsequently.

Plans 

155

14. Crisis Pressure

The crisis pressure which frequently arises from disaster impact is a 
potential destroyer of planning effectiveness. Counter-disaster planning 
usually takes place in slow time, in a calm and structured environment. 
However, disaster is the antithesis of this. Disaster is usually nasty and dirty, 
and disruptive and unpleasant. Thus, the crisis pressure generated by disaster 
impact has all kinds of unwanted effects. For instance, it may cause:

• Loss of, or major disruption to, vital communications;
• Destruction or delayed availability of planned resources (e.g., 

transport, relief supplies); and

• Disruption to the very system which has been designed to deal with 

disaster (i.e., the counter-disaster organization).

Very important also is that crisis pressure may have a very adverse effect on 
people—that is, not only to victims but disaster management ofﬁcials as well. 
For instance, cases are known where key ofﬁcials within disaster warning 
systems were so badly affected by the onset of disaster impact that they became 
badly in need of urgent medical attention. Similarly, funding agency ofﬁcials 
who had been suddenly implanted into traumatic post-impact conditions 
which they had never before experienced were, again, so badly affected that it 
became difﬁcult for them to carry out allotted tasks.

Crisis pressure may be exacerbated by interventions from politicians, which 
interrupt and disrupt ofﬁcial management. It is not suggested that all problems 
of crisis pressure can be eliminated or fully counteracted all the time. However, 
if account is taken of these problems during planning, this can usually go 
some way toward reducing or offsetting their effects on disaster management 
capability to handle the particular disaster situation. For example, possible 
countermeasures might be found in personnel management (i.e., exposure 
periods to risk) or the timing of response operations immediately following 
disaster impact.

One difﬁculty about crisis pressure is that it is very difﬁcult to simulate 
during exercises or tests. There is no doubt that exercise settings can be made 
very realistic by the use of gory-looking “casualties,” and by producing lots 
of noise, dirt, and smoke. However, the precise effect of disaster impact on 
individuals—especially for the ﬁrst time—is very difﬁcult to predict.

156 Disaster Management

15. Octopus Effect

Another critical aspect concerns what is sometimes called “octopus 
effect.” This is closely related to crisis pressure and can sometimes be a part of 
it. However, it warrants separate mention.

It is very easy to assume during planning that the counter-disaster system 
(whatever it may be) will remain intact and operative and, therefore, capable 
of implementing planned countermeasures.

However, if the system itself is directly hit, serious problems are likely to arise. 
This analogy is, of course, that if the octopus gets hit on the head, its tentacles 
of organization and capability may become paralyzed, albeit only temporarily. 
For instance, a small country was hit by a very destructive tropical cyclone. 
The cyclone impacted directly on the capital and inﬂicted extremely severe 
damage. This literally paralyzed the government, and its organization and 
systems. Indeed, for 2 whole days little could be done to implement an 
organized response.

Fortunately, the country did have an up-to-date plan. Moreover, the plan was 
based on a system of regional disaster committees. This meant that in the event 
affected regions outside the capital city area were able to fend for themselves 
in a reasonably organized way until the total national system could be geared 
up. This also makes the point that a degree of decentralization (and thus local 
self-dependence) is useful in planning generally.

16. 

Information Management

It is generally accepted that effective information management is of 

utmost importance if successful response to disaster is to be achieved.

Unfortunately, in many cases, information management proves to be 
substandard, usually because of inadequacies in planning. The requirements 
for planning and implementing an information management system are quite 
clear. They (plus the interrelated systems of communications and warning) 
are covered in Chapter 11 on organization. Fundamentally, these requirements 
depend on effective functioning of the disaster information cycle comprising:

information in,

• 
• assessment or evaluation,
• decision making, and
• dissemination of information and decisions.

Plans 

157

All this, as stated above, is quite clear. However, it does call for careful detailed 
planning because many components, in the form of facilities, systems, and 
personnel are involved. For instance, if the information management system, 
as designated in the plan, depends on the temporary conversion of certain 
ofﬁce accommodation for EOC purposes, then some important prerequisites 
are involved. These usually include methodical conversion arrangements, 
extra display facilities, additional communications, and designated emergency 
staff. If these prerequisites are not planned in detail beforehand, breakdowns 
of various kinds are certain to occur. This aspect, in fact, repeatedly occurs as a 
shortcoming in various disaster analyses. The point should be carefully noted 
by disaster management planners.

17. Survey and Assessment

Survey and assessment requirements also call for careful provisions 
within plans. Again, the requirements are clear, but they are detailed and 
they do require precise arrangements. They also involve signiﬁcant logistic, 
administrative, and training aspects. One key characteristic of survey 
and assessment—from a planning viewpoint—is that several different 
specializations tend to be involved (e.g., medical and health, essential services, 
and agriculture) and therefore effective coordination is required in:

• 
• 
• 

survey and assessment operations,
the information that is acquired, and
the resultant response and recovery action.

Some of the planning issues that need to be covered for survey and assessment are:

• Deﬁnition of the data likely to be required following disaster impact 

(e.g., casualties, damage, remaining resources/facilities);

• Means available for collecting and recording information (e.g., air 

survey, ground survey);

• Provision and ready availability of survey and reporting proformas;
• Direction and management of survey and assessment activities; and
• Training and periodic brieﬁng of survey teams.

Certain publications are available on survey and assessment and disaster 
management planners would be advised to study some of these. However, provide 
a basis of information, Annex C of this handbook contains a general overview.

158 Disaster Management

18. Deﬁnition of Responsibilities

The importance of clear deﬁnition of responsibilities has already been 
stressed as a key planning guideline. Its critical nature is reiterated here. It calls 
for meticulous and often painstaking planning and there is no short cut on 
the consultative process if all responsibilities are to be satisfactorily deﬁned and 
allocated. As indicated in Chapter 8 on counter-disaster resources, the planning 
“legwork” involved in satisfactorily achieving this goal can be considerable.

19. Coordination

As with allocation of responsibilities, coordination aspects can be 
critical when plans are implemented, unless prior detailed planning has been 
very carefully and accurately carried out. Some of the aspects which produce 
problems or failures in coordination are:

• Unclear coordination responsibilities;
• 

Inadequate provision, maintenance, and preparedness of facilities, 
mainly EOCs;
Inadequate activation arrangements;

• 
• Loss of or severe disruption to vital communications links and 

inadequate planning for reserve links;

• Poor liaison throughout the counter-disaster system;
• Discrepancies in information gathering and information processing, 
leading to inaccurate situation assessment and decision making;
Inadequate direction of resource organization by EOCs;

• 
• Failure of resource organizations to carry out allotted tasks accurately 

and effectively;

• Loss of operational coherency by EOCs and/or resource 

organizations; and

• Loss or non-availability of key leaders and inadequate planning 

arrangements for substitutes.

It is important to ensure during planning that optimum arrangements are 
established for direction/coordination. However, in practice, effectiveness in 
coordination can vary markedly. This can happen for a variety of reasons, 
such as:

• Loss of experienced ofﬁcials for various reasons;
• Lack of practice in exercises and simulations;
• Limited opportunities for participation in actual operations; and

Plans 

159

• Lack of appreciation by senior disaster management ofﬁcials of the 

key importance of coordination.

Therefore, not only must the plan contain the best possible arrangements to 
facilitate and ensure coordination of effort, but continuous attention must be 
given to it. It does, in fact, provide the underlying link through the various 
factors that help maintain planning viability.

20. Viability of Plans

Once the plan has been ﬁnalized and approved, it needs continuous 
attention, especially to maintain its viability. Maintaining the viability of plans 
should be one primary responsibility of the ofﬁce or section within government 
which is charged with handling day-to-day disaster management affairs (e.g., 
an NDMO). To carry out this responsibility, it is helpful to formulate and work 
to a deﬁnite program or series of programs. Such programs, which obviously 
need the authority and support of the NDMO (or the equivalent), should 
include aspects such as:

• Exercises and tests

These can comprise major exercises aimed to test and train the 
overall counter-disaster organization; or they can be restricted to 
certain aspects, such as activation. It is, of course, necessary to use 
the results of exercises and tests to improve the plan, wherever this 
is possible.

• Functional and readiness checks

These need to be carried out periodically to ensure that key facilities 
and systems are serviceable and ready for use (e.g., EOCs, emergency 
shelters, welfare centers).

• Training activities

All training activities, in addition to exercises and tests, should be 
based on the plan. This develops and maintains awareness of the 
plan and its key role in disaster management generally.

• 

 Post-disaster r eview
As stated in paragraph 9, the plan should contain arrangements for 
ensuring that it is periodically checked and kept up-to-date. In this 
regard, post-disaster review provides a valuable means of checking 
the plan and amending it as required.

 
 
 
 
160 Disaster Management

• Use of regulatory measures

In some circumstances, regulatory measures can be applied to help 
ensure that plans are maintained and kept under review. These 
include:

– 

– 

– 

 ensuring that government departments maintain their own 
action plans, using a standard format;
 directing departments to report their state of readiness to the 
NDC (or its equivalent); and
 withholding annual budget allocations to departments until 
their state of readiness has been certiﬁed.

• 

International assistance liaison
The plan should contain the arrangements that apply to international 
assistance and the liaison channels which are to be used. If, as should 
be done, ongoing dialogue in various forms is maintained with 
international assistance agencies, according to the plan, this means 
that the latter is being partially exercised in non-disaster times.

• Public awareness activities

Some public awareness activities offer a good opportunity for 
maintaining the viability of the plan. For instance, a National 
Disaster Preparedness Day can help raise levels of awareness for both 
ofﬁcial agencies and the community. The day needs to be widely 
publicized and set at the most appropriate time such as before the 
ﬂood or cyclone season. On this day, all government ofﬁcials having 
responsibilities under the plan would check all aspects of planning, 
preparedness, and response relevant to those responsibilities. NGOs 
would be asked to do likewise. NDC would meet to consider the 
general preparedness situation if a disaster struck on this day. EOCs 
would also be given a test activation. Action could also be initiated 
at local government level and in schools; for instance, a simulated 
evacuation of an area or a school building. These are, of course, only 
simple examples. The point is that if ofﬁcials and the community 
can be involved in this type of activity, then automatically various 
aspects of the plan’s viability are being tried out.

• Publicity on preparedness

If the disaster threat or part of it is seasonal, this provides a good 
opportunity to give realistic publicity to preparedness measures 
contained in the plan. Suitable media coverage for this therefore 
assists in maintaining viability.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plans 

161

• Education in schools
 Many countries have introduced appropriate disaster education 
into school programs. This, again, needs to be based on relevant 
plans and therefore assists community awareness.

• The plan itself

The plan itself can also contribute to viability. If it is attractively 
presented, clear and easy to read, people will refer to it. On the 
contrary, if the plan is a muddled, tired-looking document, 
overwhelmed by masses of statistics, no one will bother to look at 
it, let alone read it.

One of the most effective means of maintaining the viability of plan is, of 
course, regular operational use. Therefore, (and unfortunately in a sense) 
countries and areas which face a high level of disaster threat are likely to have 
less problems in maintaining viability than those in which the threat is low 
level and infrequent.

21. Planning Responsibility

Obviously, the responsibility carried by disaster management planners 
is onerous. If the planners get the plan wrong, then the repercussions can be 
very severe and widespread, possibly involving the loss of many lives.

On the other hand, accurate and meticulous planning not only produces an effective 
plan, it also provides the focus for successful disaster management overall.

Aspects for Consideration During Planning

22. The purpose of this section of the chapter is to provide a reference for 
the formulation of counter-disaster plans by listing major aspects that need to 
be considered.

23. The planning process usually involves consideration of a wide range 
of disaster-related matters to decide what is eventually included in the plan. 
However, not all aspects will be relevant to all levels of plans. Neither will 
all aspects assume equal importance in different plans. As a simple example, 
details of shelters (including their readiness and management) will be very 
important at community level but will have little or no relevance to a national 
level plan. The relevance of various aspects therefore needs to be subjected to 
careful analysis and sifting by planners.

 
162 Disaster Management

24. Most of the aspects mentioned in paragraphs 25–49 below will need 
to be considered during the process of formulating a counter-disaster plan. 
In practice, this consideration is not chronological; it requires constant cross-
reference and adjustment between the various aspects. Also, there is no set 
point in the planning process at which it is best to draw up an outline of the 
plan. Generally speaking, the sooner a reasonably ﬁrm outline is available, 
the easier it is for the planners to begin putting together the component parts. 
However, in some cases, the disaster management authority (the minister 
and/ or the National Disaster Council) may require a preliminary outline plan 
before authorizing planning to go ahead.

25. Policy Direction

All relevant resources of policy need to be examined. These might include:

• National development plans,
• National disaster management policy statement, and
• Speciﬁc directions concerning the formulation of counter-disaster 

plans.

26. Legislation

This might include:

• Special disaster legislation,
• Emergency powers, and
• Any other relevant regulations.

27. The Disaster Threat

This obviously needs to be carefully analyzed and to cover all possible 
eventualities, taking into account action that has been or is being taken with 
regard to hazard identiﬁcation, vulnerability assessment, and risk evaluation.

28. Disaster Scenarios

It is often helpful to consider speciﬁc disaster scenarios that might 
emanate from the disaster threat. This enables planners to obtain a focus on 
particular eventualities, in terms of examining warning, activation, mobilization 
of resources, initial response operations, and the possible scale of total response. 
Some planners advocate the inclusion of disaster scenarios in the plan itself but 

Plans 

163

others argue that this may encourage a set, inﬂexible approach to use of the 
plan. Choice in this matter depends largely on individual circumstances.

29. Likely Problems Arising from the Threat

These problems which would, of course, come under scrutiny in 
consideration of possible disaster scenarios can be deﬁned fairly easily, (see 
also Chapter 2). The important thing, in relation to the plan, is that the 
problems should be realistically related to the actual components of the threat. 
This may, in fact, give some indication of which priorities need to be given to 
countermeasures but this very much depends on local circumstances.

30. Scope of Disaster Management Effort

Governments sometimes ﬁnd it necessary, for ﬁnancial and other 
reasons, to place limitations on the scope of disaster management activity. 
Where this applies, plans are likely to be restricted accordingly; if so, any 
applicable restrictions should be indicated in the plan.

31. Aim of the Plan

The aim of the plan must be accurately deﬁned. It is also important to 

deﬁne the aim clearly, preferably in a single sentence. For example:

 The aim of this plan is to deﬁne the action to be taken to deal with 
disaster in Exland.

The simple and clear deﬁnition does not preclude qualiﬁcations being made 
concerning the circumstances in which the plan might be invoked. For 
instance, a qualifying statement might emphasize that the plan is not designed 
for day-to-day incidents which are within the capacity of the normal emergency 
services; or that the plan would only be invoked after a decision by NDC.

32. Deﬁnitions

Deﬁnitions used in or applicable to the plan need to be considered and 

resolved, so that an appropriate reference can be included in the plan itself.

164 Disaster Management

33. Main Requirements for Dealing with Disaster

From consideration of:

• policy directions,
• 
the disaster threat,
• possible disaster scenarios,
• 
• 

likely problems arising from the threat, and
the scope of disaster management effort,

 it should be possible to deﬁne realistically the main requirements for 
dealing with disaster such as warning, rescue, and survey and assessment 
(see also Chapter 4 on Major Requirements for Coping with Disaster).

34. Counter-Disaster Resources

Having deﬁned, as accurately as possible, the likely requirements 
for dealing with disaster, it is logical to examine the resources available to 
implement these requirements. This is a major part of the planning process and 
needs to cover all possible availabilities of government, nongovernment and 
international assistance resources. No possibility should be overlooked.

A case is known where a light aircraft, belonging to a church body and 
kept on a remote private airstrip (plus the church’s radio communications 
network) proved to be a vital counter-disaster asset. Annexes to the plan need 
to cover a list of all resources applicable to the plan and allocation of roles and 
responsibilities to resource organizations.

35. Organization

Consideration of the type of organization needed for any particular 
plan constitutes another major part of the planning process. In this regard, 
two important requirements usually need to be carefully examined:

• First, the organization should ﬁt simply and effectively into the 

existing government organizational structure.

• Second, it should be capable of changing as rapidly as possible from 

a normal day-to-day role into an operational one.

Responsibilities also need to be deﬁned for:

• The responsible minister (or ministerial committee),
• NDC,

Plans 

165

• OCG,
• Special advisory teams (if applicable),
• NDMO,
• Relative arrangements at other planning levels, and
• 

International assistance arrangements.

These responsibilities should cover both nondisaster and disaster conditions.

See also Chapter 4 on major requirements for coping with disaster. Scrutiny of 
relevant plans from other countries may also provide some useful guidelines 
toward deﬁnition of the organizational system.

36. Preparedness Measures

Preparedness measures relevant to the functioning of the plan need to 

be considered and designated as follows:

• Types of preparedness measures,
• Levels at which the measures apply,
• Responsibilities for implementing the measures, and
• Processes by which the measures are kept updated and revised.

Special preparedness aspects—where they apply—such as emergency 
evacuation procedures and shelter arrangements may be best included as 
annexures or subplans.

37. Communications

As stressed in Chapter 11 on organization, and as strongly indicated 
in other parts of this handbook, communications constitutes a vital disaster 
management component. Nowhere is this more evident than in a counter-
disaster plan. Without effective communications, it is impossible to implement 
a plan. The planning process therefore needs to cover communications 
aspects very carefully and thoroughly with specialist advice, as required. 
Communications resources that are best included in a self-contained annexes 
to the plan need to include:

• Government services (e.g., police networks, national teleco-

• 

mmunications);
International services (e.g., aeronautical and meteorological 
networks); and

• Private networks (as appropriate).

166 Disaster Management

The aim in planing should be to provide disaster management ofﬁcials with 
the best possible communications options, plus maximum stand-by capability 
in case of failures.

38. Operational Direction and Coordination

Arrangements for the direction and coordination of operations need to 

cover aspects such as:

• Responsibilities,
• EOC facilities and their locations, and
• Stafﬁng arrangements.

39. Warning

The warning information contained in the plan obviously needs to be 

clear and unambiguous. It should include:

• Types of warning relevant to various forms of disaster threat;
• Sources of warning;
• Distribution of warning information to key ofﬁcials and agencies;
• Dissemination of warning to the public; and
• Notiﬁcation of “All Clear” if, for any reason, the threat does not 

materialize.

40. 

Implementation of the Plan

Planners should consider the inclusion in the plan of a system of 

implementation, probably in stages such as:

• Stage 1 Alert (or Readiness),
• Stage 2 Stand-by, and
• Stage 3 Action.

The advantages of a system such as this are:

• 

• 

• 

It is a convenient way of informing disaster ofﬁcials and the public 
of the progress of the disaster threat and the action being taken.
It helps ensure a graduated and methodical response to the disaster 
situation.
It also helps to avoid overmobilization of resources, if the disaster 
threat does not develop.

 
Plans 

167

Obviously, in no-warning situations, Stages 1 and 2 become non-applicable 
and this needs to be explained in the plan.

41. Operations

This section needs to provide a form of operational checklist for the 
user of the plan. It therefore needs to be comprehensive but as succinctly as 
possible. It should include:

• Precautionary measures on receipt of warning;
• Activation of EOCs;
• Direction and coordination of operations (operational additions, as 

required, to paragraph 38 above);

• Operational requirements in the stricken area, for example:

 Survey and assessment,
 Rescue,
 Treatment and care of casualties,
 Clearance and access,
 Communications,
 Evacuations,
 Shelter,
 Food,
 Water and power supplies,
 Temporary subsistence supplies,
 Health and sanitation,
 Security,
 Public information,
 Construction requirements,
 Disaster welfare inquiry, and
 Other requirements speciﬁc to the situation.

Also included in this section should be a reminder that certain operational 
action will probably need to be taken speciﬁcally from national level; for 
instance, requests for special aerial reconnaissance by overseas agencies, 
operational assistance teams, etc.

The section also needs to include a reminder that the emergency phase of 
operations should be kept reasonably short. In practice, this emergency phase 
tends to be about 2–3 weeks, after which the normal systems and processes of 
government should progressively apply.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
168 Disaster Management

42. Recovery

This section of the plan needs to state brieﬂy the policy for post-disaster 
recovery and the main measures usually involved. In most cases, recovery 
arrangements—since they can be very protracted—are made the subject of 
a separate recovery plan or the responsibility of a ministerial committee. 
However, inclusion in this plan of certain key information concerning recovery 
provides a form of disaster management link.

43. Post-Disaster Review

Post-disaster review is very important to ensure that future disaster 

management arrangements are developed satisfactorily.

This part of the plan therefore needs to cover:

• Responsibility for post-disaster review;
• Subject areas to be covered;
• Debrieﬁng of individual departments and agencies;
• Review of the plan and the counter-disaster organization, and 

amend as necessary.

44. Support Measures

It is advisable to include in the plan a section covering the responsibilities 

for support measures, such as:

• Training and
• Public awareness.

Also, if required, outline programs for these aspects can be included as 
annexes.

45. Relationship with Other Plans

During the development of the main plan, the need for initiating 
associated plans and standard operating procedures will almost certainly 
emerge. The relationship with these additional plans and procedures needs to 
be covered in a section of the main plan.

46. Distribution List

The distribution list for the plan can be positioned in the front pages of 

the plan and/or as an annex.

Plans 

169

47. Contents

A clear list of the contents of the plan is important for ease of reference. 

The contents pages should be positioned at the front of the plan.

48. Authorization and Date of Issue

These need to be associated with the contents.

49 Map References

These are best positioned following the contents and authorization.

50. A suggested outline for a main action plan, based on the foregoing 
guidelines, is shown as an appendix. The outline provides a reasonable 
basis for the plan at national level for a small country; or at intermediate 
levels for a large country. It is recognized, of course, that plans based on 
this suggested outline would require additions and/or deletions to suit 
speciﬁc circumstances.

170 Disaster Management

Annex to Chapter 12

SUGGESTED OUTLINE FOR A MAIN ACTION PLAN

CONTENTS

AUTHORIZATION

MAP REFERENCES

INTRODUCTION

The Disaster Threat
National Policy
General Concepts for Disaster Action

AIM OF THE PLAN

DEFINITIONS

RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER PLANS

MAIN REQUIREMENTS FOR DEALING WITH DISASTERS

EMERGENCY POWERS

Disaster Legislation
Other Legislation

 COUNTER-DISASTER RESOURCES

ORGANIZATION

Organizational Structure
• Minister Responsible,
• National Disaster Council,
• Central Operations Group,
• National Disaster Management Office,
• Provincial or Regional Disaster Committees,
• 
• Nongovernment Organizations,
Organization for Counter-Disaster Operations
Allocation of Roles and Responsibilities

International Assistance Liaison, and

Plans 

171

International Assistance Arrangements
 Coordination of Planning and Organizational Measures

PREPAREDNESS MEASURES

General
National Level
Provincial Level
Community Level
Training and Public Awareness Programs

COMMUNICATIONS

OPERATIONAL DIRECTION AND COORDINATION

Responsibility for Operational Direction and Coordination
National Emergency Operations Center
Provincial or Regional Emergency Centers

WARNING ARRANGEMENTS

General
Agencies Originating Warning
Transmission of Warning
Dissemination and Public Broadcast of Warning
Notification of All Clear

OPERATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION OF PLAN

Stages of Implementation

 COUNTER-DISASTER (OR RESPONSE) OPERATIONS

Precautionary Measures
Activation of Emergency Operations Centers
Direction and Coordination of Operations
Information Requirements
Operational Requirements in Stricken Areas
Operational Action – National Level
Operational Action – Provincial, Regional, and Local Levels
Period of Disaster Operations (Emergency Phase)

172 Disaster Management

RECOVERY

Statement of Policy for Recovery
Responsibility for Recovery Programs
 Cross-Reference to Recovery Plan (if applicable)

 POST-DISASTER REVIEW

Responsibility
Debriefing
Review of Plans and Organizations

SUPPORT MEASURES

Training
Public Awareness

VIABILITY OF THE PLAN

Responsibility for Ensuring Viability

ANNEXES

Distribution List
List of Definitions
List of Resources
Functional Diagram of Organization
 Allocation of Roles and Responsibilities to Resource

Organizations

Guidelines for International Assistance Arrangements
Communications
Detailed Information on Warning
Precautionary Measures on Receipt of Warning
Guidelines on Training
Guidelines on Public Awareness
Format for Departmental Standard Operational Procedures
 Duties and Responsibilities of National Disaster Management

Office

Chapter 13

Use of Resources

Purpose

1. 
The purpose of this chapter is to consider major factors that apply to 
use of counter-disaster resources. Certain aspects relating to resources are also 
contained in Chapter 4 on major requirements for coping with disaster and in 
Chapter 8 on counter-disaster resources. These are summarized in paragraphs 
3 and 4 below.

2. 

Aspects covered in this chapter are:

the need for optimum use of resources;
• 
• 
functional requirements of resource organizations;
• management of resources for optimum effectiveness;
• activation of resources;
• graduated response; and
• commodity management.

Summary of Aspects Covered 
in Chapters 4 and 8

Some aspects concerning use of resources are contained in Chapter 4. 

3. 
They are summarized below:

• There are many difﬁculties in achieving optimum use of resources. 

Most of the prevalent ones are listed.

• An important management proviso is to correctly use of management 

systems within individual resource organizations.
• Effective resource management depends largely on:

– a capable EOC system;
– a good information picture;
– 

 effective communication between the direction/coordination 
authority and individual resource organizations; and
 sensible commitment of resource organizations to operational tasks.

– 

 
 
 
 
174 Disaster Management

4. 

Chapter 8 covers the following aspects:

• Types of counter-disaster resources.
• Evaluation of resources.
• Examples of roles and responsibilities.

The Need For Optimum Use of Resources

5. 
One hard fact of life that emerges from analyses of disasters is that 
available resources are seldom adequate to cope with requirements. Moreover, 
the pattern of shortfall or discrepancy is subject to considerable variation, as 
the following examples indicate:

• Disaster can make very heavy demands on some resources but 
not necessarily on others. For instance, response to an earthquake 
situation places high priority on heavy earth-moving equipment, 
search and rescue, and special medical skills to the extent that these 
resources are nearly always overburdened.
In some disaster situations, adequacy of one resource capability may 
be reduced or offset by limitations in other resources. For instance, 
in a situation where there are heavy requirements for emergency 
feeding, food resources may be adequate but distribution capability 
is not.

• 

• Shortfalls in resources may sometimes be self-imposed. For example, 
if planning has been inadequate, the full range of communications 
resources may not be available when urgently required.

In addition to the foregoing considerations, it is necessary to bear in 

6. 
mind that:

• Under most circumstances, the possible scope of disaster 
management activity is wide and varied; therefore, the participation 
of many organizations, facilities, and personnel is required. This 
can pose numerous problems in management and use.

• The impact of major disaster imposes severe demands across a wide 

part, it not all of the national structure.

• Recovery from disaster places a considerable overload on many 

national resources, often over a prolonged period.

7. 
There is nothing new, therefore, in situations where individual countries 
around the world may ﬁnd themselves pinched for adequate resource capability.

Use of Resources 

175

Moreover, it is widely accepted internationally that it is neither practicable nor 
cost-effective to have special services—as distinct from standard emergency 
services—standing by just in case a disaster occurs. The alternative, therefore, 
must be to use existing capabilities. However, when the requirements of 
preparedness for response to and recovery from disaster are considered 
and assessed, it becomes abundantly clear that these capabilities have to be 
optimized. In other words, there is little point in expecting disaster-relevant 
resources to be effective in their normal role, plus a disaster role, without 
enhancing their performance to a required level.

However, the nature of most counter-disaster resource organizations 
8. 
is such that it is not easy for them to achieve and maintain peak dual-role 
performance by their own means. For example, most government departments 
(which constitute primary counter-disaster resources) are rigidly tasked and 
staffed. Moreover, they tend to be under the continuing pressure of establishment 
cuts and other forms of economies. Generally speaking, therefore, these kinds 
of resources will not achieve high levels of effectiveness in their disaster roles 
if they are left entirely to their own devices. This, obviously, is where disaster 
management assistance comes in.

9. 
Given that disaster management assistance has a viable role here, 
certain other issues need to be borne in mind. These issues relate to the fact 
that resource organizations tend to vary in regard to compatibility between 
their normal role and their disaster role. For instance:

• Some organizations are closely oriented toward disaster tasks. As an 
example, a public works department has the equipment for and day-
to-day experience in clearing debris and cutting access roads, which 
is a primary disaster task. Similarly, much of a telecommunications 
agency’s daily task is concerned with maintaining communications 
systems; in times of disaster that task may increase considerably 
but, in essence, it does not change.

• Other organizations, however, may have to make signiﬁcant 
adjustments when extending into their disaster roles. A community 
services department, which is heavily desk-oriented normally may 
have to switch a proportion of its personnel into active ﬁeld roles 
for emergency feeding and welfare center purposes.

• Some resource organizations may have difﬁculty in extending 
satisfactorily into their disaster role because of the need to keep 
their primary role functioning at near-normal level.

• With NGOs, the assumption of disaster roles is often easier than is 
the case with government organizations. Most NGOs are normally 
concerned with various aspects of community care and assistance. 

176 Disaster Management

They are, therefore, well suited to carry out similar disaster roles 
and, indeed, in most cases would expect to do so. Moreover, 
because of their charters, the majority of such organizations would 
have difﬁculties in changing roles. From a disaster management 
viewpoint, this is a mixed blessing because it could, under many 
circumstances, provide an excess capability in one general role area 
while, at the same time, precluding the switch of excess resources 
into other roles.

The above illustrations indicate that if disaster management authorities assume 
responsibility for ensuring that all resource organizations can convert readily 
into the disaster mode, they must be aware that complications, such as those 
above, are involved. Moreover, the illustrations suggest that conversion cannot 
be standardized and that therefore alternative and ﬂexible methods need to 
be devised.

Functional Requirements of Resource Organizations

Before examining these possible methods, however, it is advisable 
10. 
to look further at some of the key requirements that affect the functions of 
resource organizations. These include:

• Clear understanding of the disaster role

It is obviously necessary that organizations should have an absolutely 
clear understanding of the disaster role(s) required to be fulﬁlled, 
especially the additional commitments involved.

• Organizational scope and limitation

The scope and limitation of organizations in relation to their disaster 
tasks also needs to be examined; for instance, to identify any sections 
and/or personnel who may not be required to participate in the 
allotted disaster role. These sections/personnel may be valuable for 
earmarking as reserve capability of some kind.

• Role capability

The capability of organizations to fulﬁl their disaster roles must also 
be examined, monitored, and conﬁrmed; also their ability to sustain 
the role under disaster conditions.

• Timely role conversion
 Organizations must be able to convert to their disaster roles in 
time to meet tasking requirements; alternatively, there must be 
adjustment to those requirements.

• Suspension of normal role elements

If some elements of some organizational roles can be temporarily 
suspended or left in abeyance, these should be identiﬁed as clearly 

 
 
 
 
Use of Resources 

177

as possible, thus releasing the relevant resources for disaster 
purposes.

• Effect of disaster commitments on own resources

A factor which often concerns and constrains organizations in 
relation to disaster roles is the various forms of loss which they 
may suffer. This can happen in the form of using up fuel, transport 
capability, supplies and budget allocations. The result is that, after 
the disaster, an organization’s own role capability is depleted or 
downgraded. Moreover, in conditions of post-disaster stringency, 
the losses may take a signiﬁcant time to recoup. This point needs to 
be resolved, as far as possible, especially to ensure that organizations 
are not inhibited from carrying out their disaster operations.

• Exposure to risk

Sometimes disaster operations may expose the personnel and 
equipment of resource organizations to risk or loss. This may not 
be acceptable to resource organizations, resulting in reluctance to 
carry out certain tasks. This point, if it is likely to be relevant, needs 
to be satisfactorily settled during the planning process.

• Legal Implications

As with exposure to risk, disaster operations may sometimes involve 
disaster workers and/or organizations in legal implications. For 
instance, damage may be caused to private property during these 
operations. Resource organizations need to be assured that they are 
safeguarded against this kind of eventuality. Disaster legislation can 
usually be framed to cover this kind of possibility.

11. The effect which a disaster commitment might have on a resource 
organization can be illustrated as shown below.

Normal
Activity
Flow

EXTRA
DISASTER
ACTIVITY

EXTRA
EXTRA
DISASTER
DISASTER
ACTIVITY
ACTIVITY

Normal
Flow
Restored

 
 
 
178 Disaster Management

This onion or balloon effect, if it occurs, obviously needs to be controlled 
and kept to a minimum, otherwise the organization may choke and become 
useless in its disaster role. Possible ways of dealing with this problem are 
suggested in paragraph 15 below.

Management of Resources for 
Optimum Effectiveness

12. 
Probably the biggest problem concerning the key requirements in 
paragraph 10 above is ensuring that they are fully recognized and accepted 
by both resource organizations and disaster management authorities. Once 
the requirements are thus clariﬁed, there is no reason why they cannot be 
resolved by good disaster management processes, as suggested in paragraphs 
13–18 below.

13. Rationalization of Roles

The overall management requirement is obviously to achieve the best 
possible rationalization of the major aspects that affect both normal roles and 
disaster roles. It is suggested that this is, to a large extent, an ongoing disaster 
management task. It may involve a substantial monitoring component, 
especially if variations and changes are likely to occur in either normal roles 
or disaster roles. If standard operating procedures (see paragraph 16 below) 
are maintained, these provide a useful medium for monitoring and checking. 
Moreover, if such standard operating procedures are ofﬁcially authorized 
in disaster legislation and/or counter-disaster plans, they provide a means 
of formal backing for the disaster management authority and, indeed, for 
resource organization also.

14. 

 Special Considerations Affecting Nongovernment 
Organizations

While most factors covered by this chapter apply to all resource 
organizations, in some circumstances, special arrangements or adjustments 
may have to be made for NGOs. Although it is widely recognized internationally 
that NGOs play a most worthy and valuable part as resource organizations, 
governments often differ in their views on NGO incorporation. For example, 
some governments prefer not to liaise with individual NGOs but, instead, to 
deal with some form of NGO committee or other representative body. Also, 
NGOs themselves sometimes prefer to work through their own representative 
body. In such cases, NGOs may undertake to fulﬁll a number of different roles 
and let their committee allocate tasks to individual organizations.

Use of Resources 

179

From a disaster management viewpoint, the important point here is not 
so much who undertakes tasks but that these tasks should be fully covered 
and carried out with optimum effectiveness. Thus, whatever system is in place 
for NGO participation, there still needs to be a workable arrangement between 
the disaster management authorities and NGOs themselves for ensuring 
functional efﬁciency. It is also important to bear in mind that arrangements 
for NGO participation need to cover nondisaster times as well as periods of 
emergency operations.

15. Onion Effect

Some possible ways of dealing with the onion effect (see paragraph 11 

above) may be:

• The shedding of some normal role activity as soon as the need to 

• 

convert into the disaster role becomes evident.
Implementing special planning measures to absorb or offset the 
extra load, particularly during the peak load.

• The training and employment of extra staff; that is, the use of 
some form of reserve or auxiliary component. For instance, some 
countries call up and use police auxiliaries during disaster periods.
• The holding of some special stand-by facilities or capability 
(e.g. equipment, stores) if these are especially applicable to. the 
organization’s disaster role.

• The use of emergency operating procedures which reduce the 

workload.

• The acceptance of the extra load and the use of all facilities and 
staff on a crash-program basis, in the hope that the crisis may be 
 shortlived. This is not a recommended management risk and it can 
be dangerous if the crisis period is prolonged and/or a secondary 
disaster impact follows closely upon the original one.

16. Standard Operating Procedures

There is no doubt that if all resource organizations work to standard 
operating procedures, under relevant counter-disaster plans, this constitutes 
one of the most effective means of ensuring their optimum utilisation. A possible 
format for such operating procedures is given in the Appendix to this chapter.

17. Training

All forms of training which are concerned with the functions of resource 
organizations, under relevant disaster plans, obviously constitute a valuable 
means of ensuring optimum use.

180 Disaster Management

18. General

Items such as those included in paragraphs 13–17 may, in themselves, 
be almost marginal in optimizing the effectiveness of resources. Nonetheless, 
it is these marginal contributions, which when combined, ultimately ensure 
such effectiveness. Therefore, consideration of resource capability in this 
detailed way can produce real and worthwhile beneﬁts.

Activation of Resources

19. One area concerning the use of resources that may not always receive 
adequate attention in counter-disaster planning, organization, and training is 
that of activation. The activities concerned are primarily related to response, 
though they could apply to certain aspects of preparedness; for example, 
mobilizing resources to build emergency levee banks in advance of a possibly 
developing ﬂood situation. In any case, a number of factors may affect the way 
in which activation is implemented. These factors are best considered against 
what might be called a best-case situation.

20. Best-Case Situation

In this situation, the following conditions would generally apply:

• Adequate plans would be in place;
• Resource organizations would work 

to standard operating 

procedures;

• Plans and standard operating procedures would be known, 
understood, and regularly practiced by all resource organizations 
and their individual members;

• There would be an effective warning system, operating through an 

established EOC system;

• There would be effective communications for operating an EOC 

system and its resource organizations; and

• Plans and standard operating procedures would contain a graduated 

implementation system, along the lines of:

Stage 1 – Readiness (or Alert)
This stage comes into effect when some form of information is 
received which indicates that the provisions of the counter-disaster 
plan may have to be invoked. The national disaster council (or other 
appropriate body) will declare this stage in force and, if considered 
necessary, will authorize a public broadcast to this effect. NDC will 

 
 
Use of Resources 

181

consult, as appropriate, with other committees (e.g., provincial) 
involved and will decide what action is to be taken at this stage. 
NDC will then initiate such measures under the plan as necessary. 
In some circumstances, when there is no warning, this stage does 
not apply.

Stage 2 – Stand-by
This stage comes into effect when it is established that a threat exists 
to all or part of the country. It requires that all relevant organizations 
and personnel are placed on stand-by, so that they are ready to 
begin operations or action under the plan immediately when they 
are called upon. NDC, in consultation with other committees (as 
appropriate) will decide when this stage becomes operative and will 
announce it accordingly. As with Stage 1, this stage may become 
inapplicable in no-warning situations.

Stage 3 – Action
This stage comes into effect when it appears certain that a disaster 
is imminent (such as when a cyclone appears certain to strike); or 
when such an event (such as an earthquake) has already occurred. 
NDC, in consultation with other committees, as appropriate, will 
decide when this stage is to be implemented and will announce 
it accordingly. If circumstances so demand, provincial or other 
committees may make their own decisions to implement this stage. 
All relevant organizations and personnel are then to act as required 
by the plan, under the direction of NDC.

• Within standard operating procedures there would be a callout 
procedure to inform individual members of resource organizations 
that they were required for duty in their disaster roles. The 
transmission/receipt system required to implement this procedure 
would need to be as “fail-safe” as possible and the means used 
would depend on local circumstances and capability (e.g., some 
organizations might have mobile radios; others might have to rely 
on a siren system; others might be dependent on the telephone; 
others, again, might have to use word-of-mouth).

• Equipment and vehicles would be readily available for manning, 

deployment, and use.

• There would be enough warning time to enable resource 

organizations:

 
 
 
 
 
182 Disaster Management

- 

- 

 to take any necessary precautionary measures laid down in 
 counter-disaster plans and standard operating procedures, and
 to be operationally ready in time to meet the threat.

• There would be timely activation of the EOC system so that no delays 
from this source would be imposed on resource organizations.

Obviously, with certain resource organizations and/or in speciﬁc disaster 
circumstances, additional factors might apply. However, those stated above 
are likely to be the most general ones.

21. Factors Affecting Best-Case Situations

Factors that might affect the foregoing best-case situation and which 

might downgrade efﬁciency in the activation of resource organizations are:

• Warning factors (e.g., in no-warning situations it could be expected 
that activation, and therefore deployment for response operations, 
would be delayed; similar effects would arise from delays or breaks 
in the warning system).

• Loss or damage factors (e.g., loss of or damage to communication 
systems, equipment, etc. caused by disaster impact in no-warning 
situations).

• Physical access and movement factors (e.g., in short warning 
situations, such as ﬂash ﬂooding, which might prevent mobilization 
of personnel and vehicles).

• Preparedness factors (e.g., inadequacies in plans, standard operating 

procedures, or other preparedness arrangements).

Graduated Response

22. Obviously, there are beneﬁts to be derived from the implementation 
of plans and standard operating procedures by stages. This concept can be 
taken a stage further in the sense of applying a form of graduate response to 
operations; in other words, managing resources so that some capability is kept 
in reserve. The application of this system obviously depends very much on 
particular circumstances.

23. However, there is often a general tendency, immediately after disaster 
impact, to throw maximum resources into operation. Sometimes this is 
justiﬁed, for instance:

 
 
Use of Resources 

183

• 
• 
• 

to save lives by using a maximum search and rescue effort, or
to prevent ﬂoodwaters from entering a vital area, or
to contain a major ﬁre problem.

In other circumstances, a graduated use of resources is more appropriate and 
this especially applies when response operations are likely to be prolonged. 
In this regard, it is worth bearing in mind that community self-help can often 
be used to bolster resource organizations and thus spread the efforts of the 
latter over longer periods. For instance, if a major welfare center program is 
obviously going to be prolonged, specialist or professional resources can be 
eked out by using community members in appropriate roles.

In any case, whether self-help elements are used or not, it is beneﬁcial to use 
resources on a graduated response basis because this usually means that fresh 
personnel can be brought into operations at appropriate intervals. This helps 
maintain efﬁciency levels in dealing with the various tasks and, therefore, lifts 
the effectiveness of overall response.

It is suggested that this aspect especially warrant the attention of 
24. 
disaster managers who are responsible for direction/coordination and those 
who manage resource organizations.

Commodity Management

25. 
In considering use of counter-disaster resources, it is natural to focus 
primarily on resource organizations because these tend to constitute the main 
sources of equipment, vehicles, and trained personnel. However, an important 
part of resource management is concerned with commodities, such as fuel, 
food, emergency materials, and so on. Four major considerations in this regard 
are:

• Planned management of government stocks

Some countries are able to maintain stored reserves of special 
 disaster-relevant items, such as tents and generators. However, many 
countries ﬁnd themselves having to rely on existing in-country 
working reserves, for instance:
- 

 stockpiles of medical supplies, which are rotated through normal 
usage and resupply;
 reserves of building materials held for government purposes. 
These sources of supply need to be reviewed for their suitability 
and emergency availability, and arrangements made for their 
possible use under disaster circumstances.

- 

 
 
 
184 Disaster Management

• Earmarking of private sector supplies

It is also necessary to know, in time of disaster, the types, amounts, 
locations, and broad availability of disaster-relevant commodities held 
within the private sector, so that these may be quickly purchased by 
government when required. Often, international disaster assistance 
funds are available for this purpose. A broad assessment of these 
private sector resources therefore needs to be made and maintained 
by the appropriate disaster management authority.

• Supplies relevant to resource organizations

It is useful if resource organizations can maintain a record in 
their standard operating procedures of parallel resources within 
the private sector (see Appendix to this chapter). These parallel 
resources usually tend to consist of items such as vehicles and 
equipment but including appropriate stores is worth considering. 
This action should not, however, duplicate action taken under the 
foregoing category (i.e., the earmarking of private sector supplies).

• 

International assistance commodities
These also comprise a major aspect of commodity management, 
involving reception, off-loading, cataloguing, storage, security, 
and distribution (see also Chapter 9 on international disaster 
assistance). Disaster management authorities would have always 
to be well advised to try to assess, as accurately as possible, the 
requirements involved.

 
 
 
Use of Resources 

185

Annex to Chapter 13

SUGGESTED FORMAT FOR
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

GOVERNMENT OF EXLAND
NATIONAL DISASTER PLAN
MINISTRY OF XXX
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

1. Reference

 These procedures are to be used in conjunction with the National 
Disaster Plan.

2. Purpose

 The purpose of these procedures is to provide a quick and easy 
reference to the actions to be undertaken by the Ministry in times 
of disaster.

3. Preparedness Action

Ensure general readiness of Ministry to respond to disaster.
 Ensure National Disaster Plan is accurate and appropriate from 
Ministry’s own viewpoint.
 Ensure that Standard Operating Procedures are current and that 
staff are aware of their responsibilities.
 State any other aspects appropriate to Ministry’s preparedness.
 State if senior staff are represented on National Disaster Council 
or any other senior disaster management body.

4. Operational Tasks

 State operational tasks as laid down in National Disaster Plan, 
with any amplifications necessary to ensure that tasks are clear 
to Ministry staff.

5. Resource Available

 List resource suitable for and likely to be available for disaster 
purposes. It may be useful to list these under the headings of:
 Personnel – with skills and numbers available
 Equipment
 Facilities

186 Disaster Management

6. Supplementary Resources

List these under categories such as:

 Trained persons with the community who might be called 
upon to reinforce Ministry staff.
 Equipment which could be used to supplement that of the 
Ministry.
 International resources known to be, or likely to be available.
 Contact arrangements, as relevant, need to be included in 
this section.

7. Activation Guidelines

 List the most likely sources of information on which the Ministry 
would be activated (e.g., Police and/or National Disaster Council).
List activation system within Ministry.

8. Senior Department Supervisors

 List names, duties, and telephone numbers of supervisors who are 
responsible for activation and initiation of action by Ministry staff.

9. Direction and Coordination

 Outline system of direction and coordination which would apply 
to Ministry’s actions, along lines indicated below:

 In No-Warning or Short-Warning Situations
 Permanent Secretary (or designee) would authorize emergency 
response and exercise direction of departmental activities.
 If situation likely to become prolonged (as judged by the National 
Disaster Council):
- Task allocation (with priorities) and coordination would be done 

by NDC/Operations Control Group.

 - Direction of departmental activities would be by Permanent 

Secretary.

In Long-Warning Situations
 Task allocation (with priorities) and coordination would be done 
by NDC/Operations Control Group.
 Direction of departmental activities would be by Permanent 
Secretary.

10. Operational Checklists

Stage 1 - Readiness (or Alert)
Specify action such as:

Use of Resources 

187

Warn staff
 Action, as necessary, to secure Ministry property equipment 
and facilities.
 Check supplies and equipment for use during disaster.
 Warn supplementary trained persons in community (if 
applicable).
Other points relevant to particular Ministry.

Stage 2 - Stand-by
Specify action such as:

Place staff on stand-by.
Deploy resources or man vehicles as necessary.
Prepare to carry out operational tasks.

Stage 3 - Action
Specify action such as:

 Carry out operational tasks as notified by NDC/Operations 
Control Group.
 Maintain communication with Operations Control Group/EOC.
Report tasks’ progress and tasks completed to EOC.

Operation Complete
Assume normal status, on advice from NDC.
Revert to Preparedness Action, as in Section 3 above.

11. Administrative

 Maintain disaster log and necessary records to facilitate post-
disaster administrative and accounting action.

12. Stand Down

As directed by Permanent Secretary, on information from NDC.

13. Debriefing

 Carried out on instructions of Permanent Secretary, as soon as 
possible after completion of operations. Submit report to National 
Disaster Management Office, for NDC.

Date 

Permanent Secretary

Note: These Standard Operating Procedures can be adapted for use by other agencies and at 
various levels of government.

PART II

 Long-Term 
Measures

Chapter 14

Prevention

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the following major 

1. 
considerations which apply to disaster prevention:

• The need to consider disaster prevention;
• Problem areas in prevention;
• Positive approaches toward prevention; and
• Resources relevant to prevention.

The Need to Consider Disaster Prevention

2. 
For ease of reference, the deﬁnition of prevention used in this handbook 
is restated here. It covers those measures that are aimed at impeding the 
occurrence of a disaster event and/or preventing such an occurrence having 
harmful effects on communities. Constructing a dam or levee to control ﬂoods 
is an example of a preventive measure. Controlled burning off in a bushﬁre-
prone area, prior to the high ﬁre-risk season, is another example. Under 
this deﬁnition, it would appear prudent for disaster managers to consider 
prevention in the context of the following aspects:

• National development planning;
• National disaster management policy;
• Disaster legislation;
• Counter-disaster planning; and
• Special disaster-related circumstances in which particular national 

assets may be at risk.

It is with these possibilities in mind that the remainder of this chapter is 
devoted mainly to examination of some of the problem areas in prevention 
and some of the positive approaches which might be taken.

192 Disaster Management

Problem Areas in Prevention

3. 

Traditional Outlooks

There may be long-standing acceptance of hazards by governments 
and communities. For instance, a nation may have lived for centuries with a 
recurring major ﬂood problem. Therefore, the need for preventive measures 
is not recognized.

4. 

Cost

The cost of some preventive measures can be very high; for instance, 
large public works of similar engineering projects; thus, they tend to be ruled 
out, perhaps without a detailed analysis of cost–beneﬁt and other factors.

5. 

Other National Priorities

Higher priorities given to other major national programs sometimes 
totally preclude consideration of preventive measures. For example, nations 
usually prioritize programs such as medical and health, education, economic 
development, and so on. In addition, considerations affecting disaster may 
be omitted altogether from such plans. Thus, measures of prevention do not 
receive adequate or appropriate attention in national planning. In fact, some 
national development projects may actually increase disaster risks, rather than 
help prevent them.

6. 

Political Aspects

Political motives may sometimes have an adverse effect on disaster 
prevention. For instance, measures of prevention may upset the interests of 
sections of the public by encroaching on land, property, or other aspects. The 
possible political risk to a particular government or political party may not, 
therefore, be acceptable. Also, the spread and increase of population may 
expose more people to disaster risks because they may be obliged to live in, 
say, ﬂood-prone areas on low-lying islands. However, to compel such people 
to move, as a measure of disaster prevention, may not be feasible for political 
and/or practical reasons.

7. Development Problems

Normal development may cause problems related to prevention. For 
example, the safety considerations which apply to an airport may be affected 
by a number of issues. Possibilities are:

Prevention 

193

• The surrounding population may increase signiﬁcantly, putting 

• 

more people at risk in the event of a major air accident.
 The operating characteristics of new generations of aircraft may 
increase the real or perceived risks to the surrounding communities.

Pressure for preventive measures in these cases (e.g., for the closure of a 
particular airport) may well come from action groups or whole communities. 
However, such preventive measures may not be economically feasible and are 
therefore ruled out or indeﬁnitely postponed.

Other aspects of development may produce the need for measures of disaster 
prevention. For instance, a large-scale release of hazardous chemicals 
may constitute grave risks to large numbers of people, livestock, and the 
environment. Similarly, a ﬁre in a major multistorey building may threaten 
the lives of hundreds of people. In both these cases, strict safety measures are 
needed and they form the basis of disaster prevention. It must be remembered, 
however, that high standards of training for staff are usually vitally important 
and that public awareness and common sense are necessary to support 
preventive plans and procedures. Thus, it may be difﬁcult, in any case, to 
guarantee required standards of disaster prevention.

8. 

Balance in Disaster Management

Lack of appropriate preventive measures may often throw heavier loads 
on other aspects of disaster management when disaster occurs. This may 
especially apply to response operations and recovery action. Also in post-
disaster review or analysis, high priorities tend to be given to restoration of 
infrastructure and to aspects such as rehousing programs. Consideration of 
future disaster prevention usually comes as a lower priority if, indeed, any 
consideration is given to it at all. There is also the relevant point that over many 
years, priorities in international disaster assistance tended to be given to relief 
and recovery measures, rather than preparedness, mitigation, and prevention.

9. 

Public Apathy

Public apathy toward and/or awareness of disaster risks may mean 
that there is no pressure on governments to consider disaster management 
measures, least of all prevention.

Positive Approaches Toward Prevention

10. 
The problem areas in disaster prevention tend to require various forms of 
countermeasures. However, the nature of prevention is such that the measures 

194 Disaster Management

involved usually need to be implemented from senior levels of government. 
The population of a single community or area is unlikely to be able to institute, 
for example, a major ﬂood prevention project (though such populations can 
produce pressure through action groups and other means). The possible 
approaches suggested below therefore have these constraints in mind.

11. National Policy

There is need for a clear and comprehensive national disaster policy which 
addresses the total disaster management spectrum, including consideration of 
all aspects of prevention. Within this policy there must be a readiness on the 
part of government to institute preventive measures (especially where these 
affect the national interest) regardless of their unpopularity.

12. Legislation

If necessary, there should be resort to legislation to implement measures 

of prevention; for example, mandatory building codes.

13. Assessment and Monitoring

There should be adequate assessment and monitoring of disaster hazards 
and vulnerabilities, so that the need for prevention is accurately identiﬁed 
and deﬁned. This should lead to accurate evaluation of all reasonable disaster 
prevention projects. In this regard, it is especially important to achieve sensible 
cost–beneﬁt comparisons; for example, whether, by instituting preventive 
measures, the nation and community is going to gain more (bearing in mind 
project costs), as against the losses which may arise if nothing is done.

14. Planning and Organization

Full and appropriate consideration of all disaster aspects should be 
given within the national development plan, including the immediate and 
long-term cost–beneﬁt implications of taking or not taking preventive action.

In this context, the establishment and maintenance of a permanent disaster 
management section or center can play a vitally important part because on 
behalf of government, the section/center should keep a constant watch on 
disaster management. Thus, it is able to identify the need for preventive 
measures, whenever such need may arise. It is then the responsibility of the 
section/center to advise government on needs in the disaster prevention ﬁeld 
and the priorities which should apply.

Prevention 

195

Furthermore, there should be insistence by the disaster management section/ 
center, on behalf of the government, that an effective post-disaster review is 
undertaken after all major disaster events. This review must include advice to 
government on whether, as a result of the particular disaster, further preventive 
measures are warranted.

15. Public Awareness and Education

Public awareness and education programs should ensure, among 
other things, that disaster-prone communities are kept aware of the risks and 
vulnerabilities that may apply to them. In this way, communities are likely to 
support the need for sensible disaster prevention, if this becomes necessary.

16. 

International Assistance

The maintenance of a continuous dialogue with international assistance 
agencies can also be of use. Such a dialogue helps ensure that any proposals 
concerning disaster prevention can be evaluated and submitted to appropriate 
assistance agencies.

Resources Relevant to Prevention

It is important for disaster management authorities to recognize that, 
17. 
usually, the consideration, decision making, and measures of implementation 
that apply to prevention are far-reaching. Some of the main resources which 
are likely to be involved are given subsequently:

Resources to achieve identiﬁcation and analysis of disaster threats

research establishments;
technical authorities;
scientiﬁc programs; and

• academic institutions;
• 
• 
• 
• government departments and agencies which may have major 
public safety responsibilities (e.g., those dealing with land, sea, and 
air transport systems);

• private sector authorities concerned with programs and projects 
which may generate potential disaster threats (e.g., companies 
producing hazardous chemicals);
industrial safety organizations; and
international assistance agencies in connection with development 
projects of various kinds.

• 
• 

196 Disaster Management

Resources to assess the potential need for and possibilities of implementing 

programs of disaster prevention

• government departments, organizations, and agencies;
• national planning authorities;
• disaster management authorities; and
• co-opted specialist institutions.

Resources to implement disaster prevention programs and measures

• government departments (especially those possessing technical 

capability and expertise);

• private sector companies and contractors;
• NGOs;
• military forces;
• 
• disaster management authorities.

international disaster assistance agencies; and

Resources to support disaster prevention activity

• NGOs;
• media;
• general public; and
• educational authorities.

Chapter 15

Mitigation

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline major considerations which 

1. 
apply to disaster mitigation.

There are various deﬁnitions of disaster mitigation. For the purposes of 

2. 
this handbook, mitigation is deﬁned as involving:

Measures aimed at reducing the impact of a natural or man-made 
disaster on a nation or community.

With this deﬁnition, the basic assumption is that, while it may be possible to 
prevent some disaster effects, other effects will obviously persist. The concept 
of mitigation recognizes this and maintains that the application of certain 
measures (usually in the form of speciﬁc programs) can moderate or reduce 
disaster effects.

Many factors that apply to prevention also apply to mitigation. However, 
3. 
in the interests of clarity and ease of reference, this chapter is intended to 
be as self-contained as possible. Thus, any repetitions from Chapter 14 are 
made intentionally.

Acknowledgments

4. 
A good deal of the information contained in this chapter has been taken 
from the Technical Background Paper of Disaster Mitigation in Asia and the 
Paciﬁc (1990), prepared by the Asian Disaster Preparedness Center of Asian 
Institute of Technology, for the Asian Development Bank. The authors of this 
paper are Dr. Ian Davis and Professor S.P. Gupta. This contribution to the 
handbook is gratefully acknowledged.

198 Disaster Management

Contents of the Chapter

5. 

The contents of the chapter cover:

• Previous references to mitigation in the handbook;
• Guiding principles of mitigation;
• Examples of mitigation measures;
• Problem areas in mitigation;
• Requirements for effective mitigation;
• Major mitigation components;
• Resources relevant to mitigation; and
• Formulation and implementation of mitigation programs.

Previous References to Mitigation

Other chapters of the handbook contain references to mitigation 

6. 
as follows:

• The introductory notes illustrate the place of mitigation in the 

disaster management cycle.

• Chapter 1, on the signiﬁcance of disaster, stresses the need for 
disaster mitigation from both a global and national viewpoint.
• Chapter 3 refers to mitigation as a main element in national disaster 

management policy.

• Chapter 5 contains a further reference to the place of mitigation in 

the disaster management cycle.

• Chapter 7, on disaster legislation, refers to the inclusion of mitigation 

in overall national planning.

• Chapter 9 quotes mitigation as a possible area for pre-disaster 

assistance from international resources.

• Chapter 12 reiterates the need to include mitigation programs in 

 counter-disaster planning.

• Chapter 14 refers to the practice, in some cases, of using the term 

prevention to include also mitigation.

• Chapter 16 refers to prevention and mitigation as usually being 
geared to major policy decisions at government level, whereas 
preparedness tends to be more locally and institutionally oriented.
• Chapter 20 emphasizes the need for post-disaster review committees 

to address problems concerned with mitigation.

• Chapter 22 emphasizes the need for communities to have a broad 
understanding of government counter-disaster responsibilities, 
including mitigation.

Mitigation 

199

• Chapter 23 mentions mitigation as an area of modern disaster 

research.

• Annex A covers vulnerability analysis aspects of mitigation.

Guiding Principles of Mitigation

The following principles are widely recognized as providing a valuable 

7. 
guide to disaster mitigation.

A. 

INITIATION

• Disasters offer unique opportunities to introduce mitigation 

measures.

• Mitigation can be introduced within the three diverse 
contexts of reconstruction, new investment, and the existing 
environment. Each presents different opportunities 
to 
introduce safety measures.

B. MANAGEMENT

• Mitigation measures are complex and interdependent, and they 
involve widespread responsibility. Therefore, effective leadership 
and coordination are essential to provide a focal point.

• Mitigation will be most effective if safety measures are spread 

• 

through a wide diversity of integrated activities.
“Active” mitigation measures that rely on incentives are more 
effective than “passive measures based on restrictive laws 
and controls.”

• Mitigation must not be isolated from related elements of disaster 
planning such as preparedness, relief, and reconstruction.

C. PRIORITIZATION

• Where resources are limited, priority should be given to the 
protection of key social groups, critical services, and vital 
economic sectors.

D. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

• Mitigation measures need to be continually monitored and 
evaluated in order to respond to changing patterns of hazards, 
vulnerability, and resources.

200 Disaster Management

E. 

INSTITUTIONALIZATION

• Mitigation measures should be sustainable to resist public 

apathy during the long periods between major disasters.

• Political commitment is vital to the initiation and maintenance 

of mitigation.

Examples of Mitigation Measures

For purposes of illustration, some simple examples of mitigation 

8. 
measures are:

• Strengthening buildings to render them more resistant against 

cyclones, ﬂoods, or earthquakes.

• The incorporation of hazard resistance in structures or procedures 

to be followed in new development projects.

• Planting certain kinds of varieties of crops that are less affected by 

speciﬁc kinds of disaster.

• Changing crop cycles so that crops mature and are harvested before 

the onset of the ﬂood or cyclone season.

• The adoption of land-use planning and controls to restrict activities 

in high-risk areas.

• Economic diversiﬁcation to allow losses in one sector to be offset by 

increased output in other sectors.

The foregoing activities can be broadly classiﬁed into structural and 
nonstructural mitigation measures, as outlined in paragraphs 14–23.

Problem Areas in Mitigation

From a practical disaster management viewpoint, certain problem areas 

9. 
can apply to mitigation. Some of these are given below.

• There may be long-standing acceptance of disaster risks by 
governments and communities, who may feel that traditional 
measures (taken over many years) are adequate. Such measures may 
include the positioning of population sites and traditional building 
practices. There may therefore be some built-in reluctance to accept 
new methods of mitigation.

• Some mitigation measures may be costly; for example, enforcement 
of building codes is likely to increase the cost of buildings. This 
in turn may reﬂect, in various ways, on costs and prices, and may 
therefore be opposed within the community.

Mitigation 

201

• Higher priorities given to other major national programs (health, 
education, etc.) may make it ﬁnancially difﬁcult to implement 
mitigation programs.

• Political considerations may rule out or restrict mitigation programs. 
If such programs are extensive and (through land-use restrictions 
and enforcement of building codes, etc.) unduly interfere with living 
conditions and standards, government may become unpopular. 
Thus, governments may not enforce mitigation programs to full 
effectiveness, in the interests of retaining political power.

• 

• Aspects of modern progress and development may affect mitigation 
programs. For instance, international standards in various ﬁelds may 
dictate that governments undertake mitigation measures (mainly 
perhaps in the form of safety measures). In such cases, governments 
may have little or no choice. This may therefore mean that other 
desirable mitigation programs will have to take lower priority.
• Lack of insufﬁcient appropriate mitigation measures may have an 
adverse effect on the ability to cope with disaster situations. For 
instance, inadequate mitigation measures may cause a signiﬁcant 
overload on response operations and result in the latter being only 
partially effective.
If counter-disaster planning is inadequate, the effectiveness of 
mitigation may be seriously reduced. For example, it may be possible 
to mitigate the effects of a disaster situation by undertaking a 
precautionary evacuation of people before the disaster strikes. 
However, 
if evacuation plans and other counter-disaster 
arrangements are not already in place, such an evacuation may 
not be possible. Even worse, if such an evacuation is attempted 
without adequate plans, the risks to the people concerned may 
even be increased. Similarly, if planning is inadequate, large 
numbers of people may, as a mitigation measure, be housed in 
unsafe communal buildings (schools, churches, etc.) In the past, in 
some countries, this has led to considerable loss of life because of 
buildings collapsing during disaster impact.
In post-disaster analysis and review, insufﬁcient attention may be 
given to mitigation measures. This can have severe repercussions 
in future disasters.
Inadequate standards of community self-reliance and self-help 
may adversely affect successful mitigation because even elementary 
precautions (such as ensuring an emergency food supply, or being 
prepared for evacuation) will not be taken.

• 

• 

202 Disaster Management

Requirements for Effective Mitigation

10. Areas of need in prevention tend to be the responsibility of senior 
levels of government and of senior management in the private sector. To some 
extent, this applies to mitigation, where measures such as building codes and 
land-use regulations usually emanate from major policy decisions. However, 
with mitigation, lower levels of government may play a greater part. For 
instance, precautionary evacuation as a mitigation measure tends to be the 
responsibility of local government or the local counter-disaster committee. 
Also, precautionary evacuation may even result from a local community 
decision or reaction.

11. Requirements for effective mitigation may include some or all of the 
following:

• A clear and comprehensive national disaster policy which addresses 
all aspects of disaster management and ensures that mitigation is 
given proper consideration and priority.

• Adequate assessment and monitoring of disaster hazards and 
vulnerabilities, so that the need for mitigation measures is accurately 
identiﬁed and deﬁned. Indeed, effective vulnerability analysis is a 
primary prerequisite for mitigation programs and Annex A deals 
with this subject in detail.

• Adequate and accurate analysis of all reasonable mitigation projects. 
In this regard, it is especially important to achieve sensible gain/
loss comparisons; for instance, whether by instituting mitigation 
programs the nation and community are going to gain more (bearing 
in mind the costs and restrictions involved), as against the losses 
which might arise if nothing is done.

• Readiness on the part of governments to institute and carry through 

appropriate mitigation programs.

• Appropriate consideration of mitigation measures in national 
development plans, including the immediate and long-term cost–
beneﬁt implications of taking or not taking mitigation action.
• A basis of organization and planning centered on a permanent 
disaster management center or section. The existence of such a 
section is vitally important in the overall disaster management sense 
because, on behalf of government, the center/section should keep 
a constant watch on disaster management. Thus, in coordination 
with other agencies, it is able to identify the need for various 
mitigation measures as they may arise. It is then the responsibility 
of the center/section to advise government on needs for mitigation 
programs, and the priorities which should apply.

Mitigation 

203

• 

Insistence by the disaster management center/section (on behalf of 
government) that an effective post-disaster review is undertaken 
after all major disaster events. This review must include advice 
to government on whether, as a result of a particular disaster, 
mitigation measures are adequate or whether additional measures 
are needed.

• Recognition that mitigation measures may originate from all levels 
of government, not only from the national level. This is important 
because, for instance, the “disaster front” is usually at the local 
government (or community) level. Thus, from this level, the need for 
mitigation measures may be more obvious than from higher levels.
• Specialist programs which may assist in the development of large-
scale mitigation measures; for instance, agricultural programs which 
assist farmers and others in mitigation of crop losses.

• Adequate public awareness and education programs, in order 
to assist communities in playing their appropriate part in 
mitigation measures.

• Support for traditional measures of mitigation, where these may be 

used in the overall disaster management sense.

• Support, also for the development of self-reliance and self-help at 
the community level because these aspects can often provide useful 
support for mitigation concepts.

12. 
In coping with problem areas, a participatory approach that involves 
governments, communities; and others concerned may be invaluable. Such 
an approach can particularly assist in identifying needs, establishing practical 
solutions and a combined sense of responsibility in program implementation.

Major Mitigation Components

Bearing in mind the mitigation problem areas and requirements outlined 
13. 
above, certain major components or activities generally apply to mitigation 
programs. These are covered below under the headings of nonstructural 
mitigation and structural mitigation.

Nonstructural Mitigation

14. 
Legal framework – Generally speaking, existing disaster-related legislation 
tends not to place enough emphasis on mitigation. In establishing or reviewing 
such legislation, therefore, it may be advantageous to ensure that mitigation 
requirements are adequately covered. Land-use planning and the application 
of building codes provide some legal basis for successful mitigation. However, 

204 Disaster Management

both these aspects tend to fall short of full effectiveness unless they are rigidly 
enforced.

15. 
Incentives – Incentives can often provide better inducements for 
mitigation than legal impositions. Government grants or subsidies may help 
persuade commercial and other institutions to include mitigation measures 
in their building or reconstruction activities. The provisions of government 
technical assistance can help toward the same end. Insurance can also provide 
useful incentives: for instance, insurance companies may be persuaded to offer 
reduced premiums for buildings, once hazard-resistance measures have been 
incorporated.

16. 
Training and education – If mitigation were to be successful, its 
requirements must be widely known and understood. Therefore, there is a 
need to train and educate all those involved, including disaster management 
ofﬁcials, construction specialists, and the general public. In this regard, public 
awareness programs can provide an important foundation by informing 
people generally of the need for and beneﬁts of mitigation programs (see 
also paragraph 17 below for more details on public awareness). In a more 
speciﬁc sense, programs of training and education are necessary to ensure that 
mitigation programs will be supported and property implemented. Four target 
groups are especially important:

• Public ofﬁcials who play a vital role in disaster management. 
Appropriate training modules should be incorporated in their 
 career path training programs and opportunities provided to them 
to attend specialist courses.

• Technical students whose professional education should include 

disaster mitigation courses.

• Small builders and craftsmen who may be given on-the-job training 

in simple mitigation practices.

• Schoolchildren who should be introduced to simple mitigation 
measures in the context of environmental studies, natural science, 
or geography classes. (The Fiji Islands and the Philippines have 
developed appropriate curricula and materials which may help 
other countries).

17. 
Public awareness – In addition to general awareness, certain particular 
areas of public involvement are necessary for effective implementation of 
mitigation programs. These include:

• A good public knowledge and understanding of local hazards and 

vulnerabilities.

Mitigation 

205

• Public awareness of the kind of mitigation measures which can be 

applied.

• Public participation in community preparedness programs.

Governments can substantially assist public awareness of safe mitigation 
practice by ensuring that their own public buildings (such as post ofﬁces, 
schools, hospitals, government ofﬁces) and services are built of high safety 
standards. This will also help ensure that designers, builders, and engineers 
gain experience in safe construction and, at the same time, contribute to a 
safer environment.

18. 
Institution building – The strengthening of a country’s or community’s 
social structure can enhance disaster mitigation capacity. Such strengthening 
is, however, difﬁcult to achieve. Three possible ways are to extend normal 
development as follows:

• First, through institution building. Organizations that serve as coping 
mechanisms can be identiﬁed and strengthened. A deliberate effort 
can be made to increase their institutional capacities and skills, thus 
enhancing their ability to deal with a crisis.

• Second, through increasing the number of coping mechanisms 
within a country or community. By developing formal institutions 
and linking them to outside resources, means are established for 
intervention and the provision of assistance.

• Third, through encouraging actions that promote cooperation 
among different groups within society. Such cooperation can 
considerably reduce the social impact of disasters.

In their development activities, both government and nongovernment agencies 
should be careful to avoid actions that will further increase or institutionalize 
a society’s vulnerability. It is especially important to identify institutional 
dependency relationships, particularly those that may be increased in disaster 
situation, and work to eliminate them. By increasing self-sufﬁciency, agencies 
may improve the ability of families and communities to cope with disaster. 
This can be a mitigating factor and help speed recovery. Strong institutions 
can play a vital role in various aspects of mitigation such as promoting public 
awareness programs, training at community levels, and monitoring hazards 
and vulnerabilities.

19. Warning systems (see also Annex B) – Various modern developments 
have signiﬁcantly improved the ability of disaster management authorities
to provide effective warning of impending disaster. Better warning systems 
have, for instance, been instrumental in evacuating vulnerable groups, moving 

206 Disaster Management

livestock to safety and mobilizing emergency services and resources. These and 
associated matters are covered in detail in Annex B; however, in the particular 
context of mitigation, three are underlined here.

• The steps between the issuing of warning and the taking of action 

by relevant authorities or vulnerable people are critical.

• Evacuation should only be ordered when hazard impact is virtually 
certain; a force evacuation order for a hazard that does not materialize 
can destroy public conﬁdence in the warning system and neutralize 
several years of preparedness planning.

• To the extent possible, the dissemination of warnings should 
use duplicate systems to ensure effectiveness; for example, radio 
message backed up by siren warnings, and warning ﬂags backed up 
by house-to-house visits by local wardens.

20. Agricultural mitigation measures – Various measures can be applied in 
agriculture to mitigate the effects of disaster. These include:

• The planning of shelter breaks, comprised of trees and shrubs, to 

reduce wind effects.
• Crop diversiﬁcation.
• Adjustments to crop planting/harvesting cycles.
• Food storage programs to insure against shortage arising from disaster.

Structural Mitigation

21. Nonstructural mitigation measures may need to be complemented by 
structural measures. In the case of ﬂood-prone areas, embankments, regulators, 
drains, or bypass channels can be provided, where appropriate, to protect areas 
from damage by ﬂoods. Techniques to mitigate the effects of earthquakes, 
cyclones, and ﬂoods on structures also exist. Structural mitigation measures 
may apply to both engineered structures and non-engineered structures.

22. 
Engineered structures – Engineered structures involve architects and 
engineers during the planning, designing, and construction phases. They may 
include buildings ranging in scale from dwellings to multistorey ofﬁce blocks, 
as well as infrastructure such as electricity pylons to dams, embankments, 
ports, roads, railways, and bridges. While professionals are trained to plan, 
design, and supervise the construction of buildings and infrastructure to 
achieve necessary structural safety standards, they may need additional training 
to incorporate mitigation practices into their design of structures resistant to 
seismic shock, storm winds, or ﬂoods. The application of sound technical 
principles is achieved through:

Mitigation 

207

site planning;

• 
• assessment of forces created by the natural phenomena (earthquake, 

typhoon, and ﬂood);
the planning and analysis of structural measures to resist such forces;
the design and proper detailing of structural components;

• 
• 
• construction with suitable material; and
• good workmanship under adequate supervision.

Most countries have building codes for engineered construction. These codes 
provide general guidelines for the assessment of forces and further analysis, 
appropriate design methodologies, and construction techniques. If a country 
does not have a building code which speciﬁes design and construction 
requirements for earthquake and wind forces, such a code should be formulated 
as soon as possible, and technical personnel trained in its use and enforcement 
ensured. The quality of construction is as important as good analysis and 
design. Good workmanship must be encouraged by appropriate training and 
supervision to achieve performance.

 Non-engineered structures – Non-engineered structures are those 
23. 
constructed by their owners themselves or by local carpenters and masons 
who generally lack formal training. Such structures mainly comprise simple 
dwellings and public buildings, built with local materials in the traditional 
manner. In some disasters, high casualties and economic losses can be 
attributed to the failure of non-engineered structures. The improved designs 
vary according to the many different traditional ways of building that suit 
various cultures, climates, available skills, and building materials.

Another important aspect of increasing the safety of non-engineered structures 
is to try to ensure that they are not built on hazardous sites such as steep slopes 
subject to landslides, ﬂoodplains subject to ﬂash ﬂoods or river bank erosion, 
or coastal areas exposed to storm surges. However, people often do not want 
to leave their traditional homes and the area in which they have been living for 
generations, even though the location may be hazard prone. Economic pressures 
may also induce people to settle in hazardous areas. Wherever practical, 
incentives should be offered to attract people out of hazardous locations; 
alternately, consideration may be given to substituting appropriately engineered 
structures where this might be practical and economic, or mitigation measures 
introduced in non-engineered constructions to enhance their safety.

Resources Relevant to Mitigation

The main resources most relevant to mitigation measures and programs 

24. 
are given below.

208 Disaster Management

Resources to achieve identiﬁcation and analysis of disaster risks, hazards, 
vulnerabilities, and similar aspects usually include:

• academic institutions;
• 
• 
• 
• departments and agencies concerned with hazards 

research establishments;
technical authorities;
scientiﬁc programs;

meteorological, seismological, hydrological);

(e.g., 

• government departments and agencies which may have major 
public safety responsibilities (e.g., those dealing with land, sea, and 
air transport systems);

• government departments and agencies which are responsible for 
production (e.g., agriculture), which may be affected by disaster, 
and thus have a responsibility for identifying and implementing 
mitigation measures;

• private sector authorities concerned with programs which may 
generate potential hazards (e.g., companies producing hazardous 
chemicals); and
industrial safety organizations.

• 

Resources to assess the possible needs for and possibilities of implementing 
programs of disaster mitigation

• government departments, organizations, and agencies;
• national planning authorities;
• disaster management authorities; and
• co-opted specialist institutions.

Resources to implement disaster mitigation programs and measures

• government departments;
• construction and similar specialists;
• private sector companies and contractors;
• NGOs;
• 
• disaster management authorities; and
• communities.

international disaster assistance agencies;

Resources to support disaster mitigation activities:

• NGOs;
• media;

Mitigation 

209

• educational and training authorities;
• general public.

Formulation and Implementation of Mitigation Programs

25. The requirements and circumstances for formulating and implementing 
mitigation programs are likely to differ in various countries. However, the 
information given above should be of general assistance. Also, application 
could be made to:

Asian Disaster Preparedness
Center Asian Institute of Technology
PO Box 2754
Bangkok 10501, Thailand

concerning availability of the Asian Development Bank’s publication, Disaster 
Mitigation in Asia and the Paciﬁc.

In addition, the following considerations are likely to have some general 

26. 
application.

• 

If possible, a simple broad strategy should be devised to cover 
foreseeable mitigation requirements. This strategy should contain 
component programs, with desirable priorities.

• The strategy should be interlocked, as far as possible, with national 
development planning, environmental considerations, and other 
disaster management activities.

• A system for monitoring and reviewing the strategy should be 

introduced and applied.

• Responsibility for overseeing and coordinating mitigation activities 
should be clearly deﬁned. Normally, this responsibility would 
be vested in the minister (or ministerial committee) responsible 
for disaster-related affairs, with delegation down to the NDC. 
Responsibility for individual mitigation programs should also be 
clearly deﬁned.

• An annual progress report covering mitigation activities should be 
required; this should normally be embodied in an annual disaster 
management report to the Cabinet.

• Mitigation activity should be regarded as a suitable and productive 

area for international assistance.

• Since many different agencies are likely to be involved in mitigation 
programs, the national disaster management ofﬁce or section should 

210 Disaster Management

be authorized (on behalf of government) to fulﬁll day-to-day liaison 
requirements to ensure coordination of effort.

• For individual mitigation programs, it is likely that a particular 
government ministry/department can be given the lead role. For 
instance, a mitigation program to protect and conserve a vital road 
system should be led by the ministry responsible for roads.

• Mitigation programs should not be regarded as, or be allowed to 
become, a separate activity. They should be part of an integrated 
national program.

PART III

Major Factors
Prior to Disaster 
Impact

Chapter 16

Preparedness

Purpose

As with other aspects of disaster management, different deﬁnitions can 

1. 
apply to preparedness. The deﬁnition used in this handbook is as follows:

Measures which enable governments, organizations, communities, and 
individuals to respond rapidly and effectively to disaster situations. 
Preparedness measures include the formulation to viable disaster plans, 
the maintenance of resources, and the training of personnel.

2. 
Given the above deﬁnition, preparedness clearly merges with several 
other major facts of disaster management, some of which have been covered 
at length in preceding chapters. Cross-reference to these major facts is given 
in paragraph 4 below.

3. 
This chapter is therefore designed to interrelate with general preparedness 
measures, such as planning and training, but to focus more speciﬁcally on 
the development and maintenance of preparedness, including its effectiveness 
prior to disaster impact. Aspects covered are:

• The nature of preparedness,
• Some problem areas in preparedness,
• A summary of preparedness needs,
• Maintenance preparedness levels,
• Fundings,
• Warning aspects,
• Precautionary measures prior to disaster impact, and
• Resources relevant to preparedness arrangements.

214 Disaster Management

References to Other Aspects of Preparedness

For ease of reference, other aspects that are part of overall preparedness, 

4. 
or which interrelate with it, are summarized below.

• Chapter 3 deals with national disaster management policy.
• Chapter 4 covers major requirements for coping with disaster 
and includes aspects of organization, planning, resource use, and 
training, all of which have relevance to preparedness.

• Chapter 5 illustrates the place of preparedness in the disaster 

management cycle.

• Chapter 11 deals with organization, including components that are 

fundamental to preparedness capability.

• Chapter 12 deals in some detail with plans and emphasizes the 
importance of planning in relation to preparedness and response.
• Chapter 13 that considers the utilization of resources and which 
emphasizes, among other aspects, the importance of systematic 
preparedness.

The Nature of Preparedness

5. 
The references included in paragraph 4 above throw an interesting light 
on the way in which preparedness is interrelated with so many other aspects of 
disaster management. In fact, it can almost be said that every aspect of disaster 
management can affect, or be affected, by preparedness. There is, however, 
another signiﬁcant factor which concerns preparedness. This is its different 
nature when compared with prevention/mitigation. Measures of prevention/
mitigation tend to be geared to major policy decisions at government level; they 
also are usually directed primarily from senior management levels. Preparedness 
measures, however, tend to be more strongly oriented toward action by 
individual organizations. The fact that, generally speaking, signiﬁcant numbers of 
organizations are involved in preparedness emphasizes that there is more critical 
requirement for coordination than may be the case with prevention/mitigation.

Some Problem Areas in Preparedness

6. 
Because of its diversity and the large number of organizations which 
it usually involves, preparedness can produce certain problem areas, as 
indicated below.

7. Organization and Planning

• 

Inadequate policy direction for overall disaster management will tend 
to have adverse effects on the event and standard of preparedness 
(as it does on other aspects of disaster management).

Preparedness 

215

• Lack of appropriate counter-disaster plans will also result in 

inadequate preparedness.

• 

• Outdated plans will also tend to affect preparedness standards. 
Allowing plans to become outdated is, in fact, a common and 
serious disaster management shortcoming.
If disaster management organizational structure is inadequate or 
inappropriate, preparedness measures will unlikely be fully effective.
• Over concentration on response and recovery measures may lead to 
low preparedness standards. This also tends to be a fairly common 
failing in disaster management.

8. 

Resources

Unless there is a complete inventory of resource organizations, plus 
clear allocation of roles and responsibilities to those organizations, gaps or 
overlaps in preparedness arrangements are likely to exist.

9. 

Coordination

• 

Inadequate coordination in disaster management may result 
in substandard and/or variable levels of preparedness, because 
departments and organizations may be working to different 
preparedness criteria and different priorities.

• Friction and/or 

lack of cooperation between disaster-related 
organizations can have very bad effects on preparedness. Such problems 
may arise from inter-organizational rivalry, poorly deﬁned areas of 
responsibilities, or clashes of personality between senior ofﬁcials.

10. Readiness

Without a national or central disaster management section or center to 
serve as a focal point, it is very difﬁcult to monitor standards of preparedness. 
For instance, emergency operations centers may become inadequately 
prepared to respond quickly to the onset of disaster; emergency equipment, 
such as stand-by power generators, may be allowed to become unserviceable; 
and emergency communications equipment may not be adequately serviced 
and tested.

11. Training and Public Awareness

• Lack of suitable training for disaster management personnel will 

obviously result in low standards of preparedness.

216 Disaster Management

• 

Inadequate public awareness and information concerning disasters 
usually contributes signiﬁcantly to poor preparedness.

Summary of Preparedness Needs

12. The maintenance of effective disaster preparedness is a dynamic 
requirement. Left to itself, preparedness will quickly fade away even to the 
point of becoming virtually nonexistent. Also, it is always difﬁcult to maintain 
adequate preparedness levels under circumstances where the disaster threat is 
low and/or very infrequent.

13. 
This section of the chapter therefore presents a summary of many different 
aspects affecting preparedness. The summary is formulated in such a way 
that it provides a form of ready-reference checklist for disaster management 
ofﬁcials. Some advice on the maintenance of preparedness levels is also included.

14. National Disaster Policy

There is need for a clear comprehensive national disaster policy which 
covers all aspects of disaster management and which ensures that preparedness 
is given proper consideration and priority.

15. Disaster Legislation

Special disaster legislation may be necessary to ensure that preparedness 
aspects of national policy are adequately covered and implemented. In some 
countries this has been found necessary, especially to ensure that preparedness 
measures exist in the private sector and/or within communities.

16. Organizational Structure

A clear and workable organizational structure must exist so that levels 
of disaster preparedness are identiﬁed. Disaster legislation helps formalize this 
aspect. There is also need within the organizational structure for some form of 
national disaster management section or ofﬁce.

17. National Disaster Management Section (or Ofﬁce)

In relation to preparedness, some form of national disaster management 
section or ofﬁce is vitally important. As stated in paragraph 12 above, disaster 
preparedness is a dynamic requirement. Thus, a continuous process of 
monitoring needs to be applied to the wide range of necessary preparedness 
activities. This can be done most effectively by a specialist section.

Preparedness 

217

18. Assessment of Preparedness Action

Adequate arrangements for identifying, assessing, and monitoring the 
disaster threat are also necessary. In turn, this enables a reasonable forecast 
to be made of the likely effects arising from disasters. Preparedness is vitally 
concerned with these effects because they constitute the actual circumstances, 
events, and problems against which preparations need to be made. Usually, 
these effects are made and varied. For example, they include:

• casualties,
• damage to and destruction of property,
• damage to subsistence and cash crops,
• disruption of services,
• damage to national infrastructure,
• economic loss, and
loss of livelihood.
• 

Therefore, preparedness measures to deal with these need to be determined 
and put in place before disaster strikes.

19. Planning Framework

If preparedness measures are to be fully effective, they need to be 
clearly set out in appropriate plans. Such plans usually need to apply at the 
national, provincial/regional, and local government levels. If preparedness 
measures are set within this planning framework, responsibilities for them 
can be clearly and ofﬁcially deﬁned. This also helps ensure that the measures 
can be systematically monitored and kept up-to-date.

The production of effective counter-disaster plans usually involves considerable 
negotiation with resource organizations (e.g., government departments, 
NGOs), especially to ensure that their capability is used to the maximum 
extent. This is important because, especially in severe disaster circumstances, 
the total capability of these organizations is needed to deal with the many 
operational tasks which arise.

20. Use of Resources

If available resources are to be used to optimum effect, there must be:

• An accurate and up-to-date inventory of all available resource 
organizations (e.g., government departments, NGOs, potential 
international assistance agencies).

218 Disaster Management

• Clear allocation of the roles and responsibilities, which resource 
organizations are required to undertake during response operations 
and, where necessary, during the recovery phase.

• Suitable preparedness arrangements within resource organizations 
to ensure that they are able to fulﬁll their roles when required. It 
is advisable that their preparedness arrangements follow common 
guidelines and that these guidelines be issued by the national disaster 
management section as part of the general planning process.
It is also desirable that the capability of resource organizations 
should be monitored, as appropriate, to ensure that operational 
roles can be fulﬁlled. This can usually be done by the organizations 
themselves but, if necessary, assistance can be provided for the 
national disaster management section.

• 

• Consideration should also be given to preparedness measures 
necessary for the reception and use of international resources. These 
might include arrangements for reception, storage, and distribution 
of relief commodities; use of assistance teams (e.g., rescue workers, 
medical personnel, technical teams); ﬂy-in and turn-round of 
assistance aircraft, including refueling and similar arrangements; 
and port-handling facilities for visiting sea transport.

21. Coordination of effort

Disaster preparedness and the response operations to which preparedness 
essentially applies involves a wide range of activities and organizations. If these 
activities are to be successfully carried out by the organizations concerned, a 
system for achieving coordinated effort is clearly needed.

This system is usually provided through the organizational framework. For 
instance, a provincial disaster committee would normally coordinate activities 
within its area of responsibility. However, additional coordinating responsibilities 
may be designated to organizations or individuals, if deemed necessary.

Arrangements to achieve successful coordination of effort must obviously be 
made, as a part of preparedness, before disaster impact.

22. Operational Facilities and Systems

Adequate preparedness of the various facilities and systems which are 
required for response operations is also most important. Such facilities and 
systems usually include:

Preparedness 

219

• emergency or stand-by communications;
• a warning system, including provision of warning and information 

to the general public;

• a system for activating the organizational structure and its resource 
organizations (usually by designating stages such as Alert, Stand-
by, and Action);

• emergency operation centers (which form the focal points of 

information management);

• a system for damage survey and assessment of needs;
• emergency relief arrangements (for food, shelter materials, medical 

assistance, etc.).

23. Equipment and Supplies

If stockpiles of emergency equipment and supplies are held, these need 
appropriate surveillance to ensure their serviceability and ready availability. 
Emergency equipment needs to be held at the levels where it will be primarily 
used (e.g., equipment for local self-help teams, such as picks and shovels, 
needs to be held at the community level). Sometimes safe storage (and thus 
ready availability) poses some problems. However, these can usually be 
overcome locally. In one case, the village schoolmaster was made responsible 
for storing and maintaining emergency stocks and schoolchildren had a part 
in checking and accounting for them.

Where there is a possibility that equipment and supplies from the private 
sector may need to be co-opted or requisitioned, preparedness arrangements 
for this eventuality need to be maintained. (See Appendix to Chapter 13, which 
gives a proposed format for departmental standard operating procedures. 
These procedures include provision for earmarking possible supplementary 
resources likely to be available within the community.)

24. Training

Training is obviously a most important component in preparedness. If 
possible, a permanent training system and program is desirable. This should 
cover not only needs of government ofﬁcials but also those of NGOs. In 
addition, training is required for persons (such as volunteers from within the 
community) who may fulﬁll or assist in disaster management system or parts 
of it, and provide valuable preparedness checks. In training, as with so many 
other aspects, the existence of a permanent disaster management section of 
ofﬁce is invaluable.

220 Disaster Management

25. Public Awareness and Education

An aware, alert, and informed public is a most valuable asset for 
preparedness. Public awareness programs can be presented in various forms to 
suit particular circumstances. Events such as a National Disaster Preparedness 
Day are helpful in promoting and sustaining public awareness. Inclusion of 
disaster awareness in school programs usually has long-term value.

26. Effects of Crisis Pressure

Disaster impact usually imposes various forms of crisis pressure on 
organizations and individuals who have to deal with the problems caused. It 
is difﬁcult to stimulate this crisis pressure in exercises or tests. Therefore, in 
formulating preparedness measures, it is advisable to take account of crisis 
pressure and, where possible, to try to compensate for it. This might be 
done by earmarking additional stand-by personnel, arranging for mobility in 
switching resources from one area to another, or similar measures.

Maintenance of Preparedness Levels

27. The maintenance of effective levels of preparedness is a major problem, 
especially because preparedness will tend to fade away if left to itself. The 
following examples, which are taken from case study information, are 
unfortunately all too common.

• Following a severe disaster, efforts were made to improve disaster 
preparedness, especially by emphasizing measures already included 
in the national disaster plan. A review of these efforts noted that, 
despite the obvious need for improvement, government departments 
did not respond to ofﬁcial reminders concerning preparedness, nor 
did they submit their state of annual readiness on the speciﬁed date, 
as required by the national disaster plan.

• An international assistance team, engaged on a survey designed 
speciﬁcally to help a disaster-prone country, noted major factors 
responsible for inadequate preparedness: government apathy, 
inactivity by the designated national disaster committee, and failure 
to maintain the viability of disaster plan.

28. 
In Chapter 12 on plans, it is suggested that certain activities and 
arrangements help maintain the viability of disaster plans. These are 

summarized below because, clearly, measures keep plans active, viable, and 
help maintain preparedness levels.

Preparedness 

221

• Training activities,
• Exercises and tests,
• Functional and readiness checks,
• Post-disaster review,
• Use of regulations,
• 
• Public awareness activity,
• Publicity, and
• Education in schools.

International assistance liaison,

29. However, there are usually two particularly key areas which, in most 
countries, can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence preparedness levels. These are:

• The lead given by the main national disaster management authority 

(e.g., the NDC or its equivalent)

• Astute use of the outreach capability possessed by most of those 

 NGOs which have a disaster-related capability and role.

30. To use to optimum effect the position and role of the national disaster 
management authority, the following lines of action need to be pursued. 
(For purposes of illustration it is assumed that a national disaster plan, with 
supporting plans, is in place; that an NDC exists; and that the NDC implements 
its day-to-day activities through a small National Disaster Management Ofﬁce 
(NDMO).

Action program of NDC
NDC needs to work to a clearly speciﬁed action program which includes 
items such as:

• A regular meeting schedule;
• An annual Disaster Management Implementation Program, which 
includes maintenance of planning viability, preparedness, training, 
and so on;
If the disaster threat is seasonal (e.g., cyclone or ﬂood), some form 
of special annual emphasis should be given to this (for instance, 
check of the warning system);

• 

• Periodic check of functional readiness (e.g., stand-by power supplies 

for broadcasting stations);

• Regular view of NDMO’s work program and allocation of priorities;

222 Disaster Management

• Assistance, usually through the NDMO, to resource organizations;
• 

Issuance of directives, where necessary, to support NDMO’s work 
with other departments and organizations (e.g., the development of 
departmental standard operating procedures);

• Periodic circulation of disaster management information sheet or 

• 

newsletter;
Inclusion of disaster management in the curricula of government 
training institutes to assist ofﬁcials in fulﬁlling disaster-related 
roles; and

• Other items to suit particular circumstances and time scales.

Work program of NDMO
As indicated above, the day-to-day work program of NDMO needs to 
be supervised by the NDC (probably through its chair) and priorities 
adjusted as necessary. The main theme of NDMO’s program should be 
to maintain the viability of disaster management during nondisaster 
times, so that capability to cope with disaster, when it strikes, is ensured. 
The work program of NDMO therefore needs to monitor:

• Policy and organization,
• Training,
• Public awareness,
• 
• Disaster reference and information facilities.

International liaison, and

With special regard to preparedness measures, NDMO needs to 
monitor and promote action on:

• Operational systems and facilities such as: communications, 
emergency operations centers (including earmarking and readiness 
of staff), warning and public information, survey and assessment, 
and disaster assistance supplies.

• Coordination and cooperation between all disaster management 

agencies, including NGOs and the private sector.

• Maintenance of close liaison with other levels of government; for 
instance, provincial and local disaster management committees.
Initiation of activities such as workshops, which help promote 
awareness and readiness.

• 

• Viability of activation arrangements.

Preparedness 

223

31. 
In many countries, particularly over recent years, NGOs have played an 
increasingly prominent role in disaster management, especially in preparedness 
and response. Many governments have realized that, because of restrictions in 
their own resources, it is beneﬁcial and effective to make optimum use of the 
religious and welfare organizations which comprise the majority of disaster-
related NGOs, because these have a very strong outreach and contact capability 
as far as the general public is concerned. In addition, NGOs of this type have 
strong links internationally. It follows that these two capabilities of outreach 
strength and international linking provide an excellent basis for promoting 
community awareness and preparedness. Some lines of activity which have 
proved successful in this regard are:

• Mobilization of NGOs under some form of umbrella organization 

for disaster preparedness and response purposes;

• Allocation of preparedness and response tasks to individual NGOs 

or group of NGOs;

• Promotion of public awareness (e.g., publicizing of disaster plans 

and self-help arrangements);

• Holding of workshops for NGOs, sponsored and funded by 

international assistance;

• Production of NGO disaster plans to interlock with national disaster 

plans;

• Stockpiling of disaster stores and other commodities (e.g., emergency 

food stocks, tools, cooking utensils, medical supplies); and

• Circulation of international newsheets.

In sum, if astute linking and programming can be achieved between 
32. 
the ofﬁcial disaster management leadership and the ongoing activities of 
NGOs, there is every prospect of developing and maintaining good standards 
of preparedness. What is more, because of the very large voluntary input 
from most NGOs, the cost of such preparedness can usually be kept to 
a minimum.

Funding

33. Whereas the ﬁnancial requirement of prevention and mitigation is 
largely self-evident, this aspect is sometimes overlooked with preparedness. 
Effective preparedness programs do require adequate budgetary support 
and, for this purpose, international assistance can often be obtained (e.g., for 
training, communication, warning systems).

224 Disaster Management

Warning Aspects

34. Warning has sometimes been described as the critical “hinge factor” 
in disaster management. In other words, it provides the vital link between 
preparedness measures and response action. From a preparedness viewpoint, 
therefore, the following aspects are of key importance:

• The warning system, and its associated procedures, must be clearly 
deﬁned and written down in plans, standard operating procedures, 
and all other relevant documents.

• The warning system must be known to and understood by all key 
government ministers, disaster management organizations and 
ofﬁcials, other relevant persons, and the general public.

• The system must possess the capability for receiving international 
warning, initiating in-country warning, and issuing warning at the 
community, national, and other government levels.

• The system must also include back-up measures, in case its primary 

• 

components fail or are damaged.
Intended recipients of warning (e.g., key persons and organizations 
and the general public) must possess the means of receiving the 
warning and must know what action should be taken.

• All facilities and arrangements relevant to warning and the warning 
system (e.g., evacuation arrangements, shelters, and safe havens) 
must be in an appropriate state of readiness to react to warning.
• Arrangements for activation and mobilization of resources must be 
in place to make maximum possible use of any warning period.
• All plans and arrangements for disaster response must make 
provision for no-warning situations (e.g., for an earthquake or 
volcanic eruption where no prior warning indicators have occurred).
• The warning system and/or component parts of it must be tested and 
practiced periodically if it is to function satisfactorily when needed.

Further information on warning and warning systems is contained in 

35. 
Annex B.

Precautionary Measures Prior to Disaster Impact

36. 
If the warning aspects outlined in paragraph 34 are applied effectively, 
they should provide optimum opportunity to take precautionary measures 
before disaster strikes. These precautionary measures are likely to vary in 
different circumstances and situations; they will also depend considerably on 

Preparedness 

225

the type and level of threat. However, because of their importance in terms of 
community safety and survival, disaster management ofﬁcials should deﬁne and 
apply those measures that ﬁt local conditions. The examples below illustrate the 
kind of precautionary measures which can generally be applied.

37. Format of Warning Information

If precautionary measures are to be effectively applied, they depend 
signiﬁcantly on the ability of people, especially the general public, to 
understand what the warning information means. Thus, warning needs to 
be disseminated in simple, understandable terms, on which people can take 
action. Preferably, therefore, plain language should be used rather than some 
form of code. There are sometimes problems in this regard, for instance:

• 

Internationally accepted regulations and procedures may require 
the use of speciﬁed terminology.

• Some terminology, though simple and clear in itself, may not adequately 
convey its full signiﬁcance of recipients. For example, a person who 
is informed that winds of 85 kilometers per hour are expected may 
have no idea what this means in terms of risk, damage, or destruction 
unless he or she has had previous experience of such conditions.

In cases where some form of code necessarily has to be used (e.g., the ringing of 
bells or the sounding of sirens), there should be no doubt about the meaning. 
Where possible, therefore, disaster managers need to take local precautions to 
ensure that warning information can be correctly interpreted. As an example, 
some countries have devised simple scales of interpretation for wind velocities. 
These scales can help assess such velocities by what they do to smoke patterns 
or the bending of trees.

38. Ofﬁcial Government Action

Some governments feel that by taking ofﬁcial precautionary action 
themselves (e.g., by closing government ofﬁces and institutions) they can help 
persuade the general public to do likewise. There can, however, be problems 
in this regard unless care is exercised. A case is known where, during a warning 
period, government employees were advised by ofﬁcial broadcast to go home. 
Employees in the private sector therefore did likewise. Subsequently, private 
sector employers asked the government for compensation to cover lost work 
output because the warning had applied speciﬁcally to government employees 
and not to those in the private sector.

226 Disaster Management

39. Power Supplies

In many disaster circumstances, it becomes necessary to cut off main 
power supplies in the interest of safety. During a precautionary period, 
therefore, emergency generators should be checked and ample fuel supplies for 
them ensured. The effect of restricted power supplies on disaster management 
operations usually needs to be countered in longer-term preparedness 
measures (e.g., in standard operating procedures). If power supplies are not 
cut off during disaster, there may be a high risk of loss of life through contact 
with broken live wires. If this possibility arises, it is usually necessary to inform 
people accordingly.

40. Transport

A warning period may also be used for ensuring that essential vehicles 
are fuelled and, if necessary, dispersed. Also, in island and coastal communities, 
boats should be fuelled and held, as far as possible, at safe moorings.

41. Crops

Under some circumstances, it may be advisable to undertake the 
emergency cutting and collection of crops, rather than risk total damage or 
loss. This might particularly apply in pre-cyclone conditions or during the 
slow onset of ﬂooding.

42. Households

In an aware community, general and seasonal measures are expected 
to be undertaken as part of overall preparedness. In bushﬁre-prone areas, 
for example, various precautions can be taken prior to the onset of high-
risk season. These may include general clearance of debris and other ﬁre-
prone material, emergency readiness of water pumps, and so on. Similarly, in 
cyclone-prone regions, general clean-up is a useful precaution, as is checking 
of roof ties, if these are in use.

Nonetheless, many precautions can also be taken following the receipt of 
warning of impending disaster impact. These might include:

• Safe storage of emergency food and water supplies;
• Shuttering, boarding-up, or taping windows;
• Broadcasting reminders of what is likely to happen during disaster 
impact, plus relevant advice (for instance, where to go if evacuation 

Preparedness 

227

is necessary). Reminders also of precautions to be taken after impact 
when there may be danger from fallen power lines, broken glass, 
weakened structures, and undermined trees.

43. Preparation of Precautionary Information

Obviously, information concerning precautionary measures needs to 
be readily available as soon as warning is received. This information therefore 
needs to be included in disaster plans and, where appropriate, standard 
operating procedures. The originators of warning (e.g., meteorological and 
geological authorities) and disseminating agencies (e.g., broadcasting stations) 
also need to have available the necessary message formats for warning 
information. It also needs to be made clear in plans and operating procedures 
that authorities are ofﬁcially authorized to originate and disseminate warning 
and other information, so that the risk of false alarm is kept to the minimum. 
In addition, it is necessary to ensure that information is disseminated in all 
relevant languages and dialects.

Resources Relevant to Preparedness Arrangements

44. The main resources relevant to developing and maintaining preparedness 
arrangements are given below.

Resources for identifying, analyzing, and advising on the disaster threat:
• academic institutions;
• 
• 
• 

research establishments;
technical and scientiﬁc authorities;
specialist agencies, such as meteorological and geological 
departments;

• disaster management authorities; and
• 

records and reports of previous disasters.

Resource organizations that need to undergo training and other forms of 
preparedness in readiness for response operations:
• government departments such as public works, medical and health, 

transport, communications, agriculture;

• NGOs; and
• emergency services (police, ﬁre authorities, ambulance services, 

civil defense, armed forces).

Resources capable of implementing training and other preparedness measures:
• NDMO
• disaster management authorities

228 Disaster Management

• government training sections;
• NGOs; and
• overseas training institutions.

Resources to support disaster preparedness activity:
• NGOs;
• commercial and industrial companies;
• educational authorities;
• media; and
• general public.

PART IV

Response to 
Disaster 
Impact

Chapter 17

Response

Purpose

1. 

In this handbook, the following deﬁnition is applied to response.

Response measures are those which are taken immediately prior 
to and following disaster. Such measures are directed towards 
saving life and protecting property and to dealing with the 
immediate damage caused by the disaster.

From the above deﬁnition, it is clear that the scope of response is usually 
2. 
extensive and that its success must depend vitally on good preparedness. 
The effectiveness of response also has a considerable bearing on subsequent 
recovery requirements and activities.

3. 
Response operations usually have to be carried out under disruptive 
and sometimes traumatic conditions. Often, they are difﬁcult to implement 
and they tend to make heavy demands on personnel, equipment, and other 
resources. Thus, without a sound basis of planning, organization, and training, 
response operations are unlikely to achieve optimum success.

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the major considerations which 

4. 
apply to response, with particular reference to the following aspects:

Important characteristics of response,

• 
• Some problem areas in response,
• Requirements for effective response,
• Follow-on from response operations,
• Human factors in response, and
• Resources relevant to various aspects or response.

232 Disaster Management

Reference to Other Aspects of Response

Various references to response have been made in preceding parts of 

5. 
this handbook. The main such references are given below.

• Chapter 2 contains lists of the general countermeasures required to 

deal with various types of disaster threat.

• Chapter 3 contains various references to the place of response in the 

national disaster management policy.

• Chapter 4, which covers major requirements for coping with 
disaster, discusses major aspects of organization, planning, resource 
use, training and specialist skills, all of which bear on response 
capability.

• Chapter 5 refers to the place of response in the disaster management 

cycle.

• Chapter 8 contains information on counter-disaster resources and 

the roles they may play during response to disaster.

• Chapter 9, on international disaster assistance, contains references 

to use of international resources in response operations.

• Chapter 10, which deals with leadership disaster, refers to leadership 

in direction of response operations.

• Chapter 11 discusses various organizational aspects which affect 
response capability, organizational structures, and response 
components.

• Chapter 12, which deals with plans, contains various references to 

the interrelationship between planning and response.

• Chapter 13 covers the utilization resources, primarily in the response 
mode, and contains suggested standard operating procedures for 
resource organizations.

• Chapter 16 deals with preparedness, including many measures 

which are prerequisites for effective response.

Important Characteristics of Response

6. 

Effective response to the impact of disaster is critical mainly to:

limit casualties,

• 
• alleviate hardship and suffering,
• 
• mitigate further damage and loss, and
• provide the foundation for subsequent recovery.

restore essential life support and community systems,

Certain characteristics typically apply to response effort. These 

7. 
include:

Response 

233

• The type of disaster

Depending on its type, the onset of disaster may provide long 
warning, short warning, or no warning at all. This will obviously 
the effectiveness of activation, mobilization, and 
inﬂuence 
application or response effort.

• The severity and extent of disaster

This represents the size and shape of response problem and 
particularly affects aspects such as:
– 
– 

the ability of response effort to cope with the problem;
the urgency of response action and the priorities which are 
applied;

– exacerbation of disaster effects if appropriate action is not taken; 

and
requirements for external assistance.

– 

• The ability to take pre-impact action

If warning time and other conditions permit pre-impact action to be 
taken (in the form of evacuation, shelter, and other protective measures), 
this may have a major effect on the success of response overall.

• The capability for sustained operations

A frequent requirement of response operations is that they must be 
sustained over a long enough period to be fully effective. Several 
factors are involved here, including resource capability, management, 
community self-reliance, and international assistance.
However, the capability to sustain operations, relative to potential 
threats, is a disaster management objective which needs to be carefully 
addressed both during preparedness and response action itself.

• 

Identiﬁcation of likely response requirements
An important characteristic of response is that it is generally possible 
to identify beforehand the kind of response action which is likely 
to be needed for any particular disaster. As indicated in Chapter 2, 
on the disaster threat, the effects likely to emanate from individual 
disasters are well established. Thus, the required response actions 
are also identiﬁable. This represents a considerable advantage in 
disaster management terms in that it is possible to plan and prepare 

234 Disaster Management

for well-deﬁned response action in the face of potential threats. This, 
again, constitutes a tangible objective for disaster management.

It is suggested that an assessment of response needs, in the light of the 

8. 
foregoing similar factors, has useful application to most circumstances.

Some Problem Areas in Response

9. 
Some of the major problem areas relevant to response are summarized 
below. These examples have been taken from a number of different 
factual circumstances and will hopefully, therefore, be of use to disaster 
management ofﬁcials.

10. 

Background Factors

lack of adequate policy direction,

These may particularly apply to preparedness, for instance:
• 
• poor organization, and
inadequate planning.
• 

11. 

Inadequate Preparedness

This can be caused by:
• plans becoming outdated,
• 
• poor public awareness, and
• disaster of unexpected magnitude.

low standards of readiness on the part of resource organizations,

12. Warning Factors

These may include:
• 
• errors in warning systems (e.g., radio broadcast stations) due to 

inadequate warning lead time,

effects of disaster impact, and
failure of people to respond to warning.

• 

13. 

Slow Activation of the Response System

This may be due to:
• warning factors,

Response 

235

• poor system for activation,
• 
• 
• coincidence with some national event ( e.g., national holiday).

lack of functional readiness (e.g., in emergency operations centers),
lack of testing and exercising the response system, and

14. 

Effects of Impact and Crisis Pressure

These may include:
• disruption to or loss of communications,
• destruction or delayed availability of planned resources (e.g., 

transport, relief supplies),

• damage to key installations such as power supplies, emergency 

operations centers, communications facilities,

• high damage levels generally, and
• 

loss of key personnel.

15. Difﬁculties in Survey of Damage and Assessment of Needs

These may arise from:
• adverse weather conditions following disaster impact (e.g., post-

cyclonic low cloud and heavy rain),
lack of suitable aircraft for survey purpose,

• 
• difﬁculties of ground survey (perhaps caused by problems of access 

and movement),
inadequate planning and preparation to cover this requirement, 
which has to cover a number of detailed aspects, and
loss of vehicles or vessels.

• 

• 

16. 

Inaccurate and/or Incomplete Information from Survey

This can cause serious response problems through inaccurate ﬁgures of 

people who are:

• homeless,
• without food and shelter, and
in need of medical assistance.
• 

17. Convergence

Convergence onto the disaster area or site by large number of people 

and vehicles can seriously interfere with response operations.

236 Disaster Management

18. 

Poor Information Management

This may arise from a number of aspects, such as:
• gathering and collation of information,
• evaluation of information,
• decision making, and
• dissemination of decisions and information.

19. 

Inadequate Relief Commodities

This may involve essential items, such as:
• 
food supplies,
• water supplies, and
• 

shelter materials (tents, tarpaulins, etc.)

20. 

Logistics Problems

These can be caused by shortage of air, sea, and land transport for the 

distribution of relief supplies and other activities.

21. 

Poor Coordination of Response Operations

information,

This can result from problems involving
• 
• duplication of effort,
• unwillingness of some private sector organizations to work within a 

 coordinating system, and
inadequate training of personnel.

• 

22. 

Inadequate Public Awareness

This can cause various difﬁculties for disaster management authorities 
when dealing with the requirements of stricken communities, especially if the 
latter do not understand local plans and arrangements.

23. 

Problems with the Media

If arrangements for dealing with the media are inadequate or unsatisfactory, 

this is likely to cause problems for the disaster management authorities.

Response 

237

24. 

International Assistance

Response operations may be adversely affected if expected international 
assistance is delayed, inadequate, or inappropriate. This can arise if effective 
prior arrangements have not been made with relevant overseas agencies.

Requirements for Effective Response

25. Wide international experience has shown that effective response 
depends fundamentally on two factors:

• 
• 

information and
resources.

Without these two vital components, the best plans, management 
arrangements, expert staff, and so on become virtually useless. Bearing this 
fundamental premise in mind, the major requirements for effective response 
are summarized below.

26. General Background of Preparedness

As indicated in paragraph 3 above, the effectiveness of response 
operations will depend vitally on the general background of preparedness 
which applies. This includes various aspects of policy direction, planning, 
organization, and training.

27. Readiness of Resource Organizations

The readiness of resource organizations (both government and 
nongovernment) to respond to disaster situations, often at very short notice, is a 
very important requirement for response operations. Sometimes, failure on the 
part of only one designated organization may seriously upset the total response 
effort. However, disaster management authorities do need to bear in mind that 
the response lead time for resource organizations can differ markedly. This 
point is referred to in Chapter 8, which deals with counter-disaster resources. 
Response management needs to take account of, and harmonize differences in, 
organizational lead times if a balanced response is to be achieved.

28. Warning

This paragraph overlaps some of the information contained in Chapter 
16. This is intentional to avoid the need for undue cross-reference, especially 
under impending operational circumstances.

238 Disaster Management

As had been emphasized at several points in this handbook, an effective 
system of warning is vitally important for successful response operations even 
though there are bound to be some occasions when little or no warning will 
be available. The main needs for warning are:

• 

Initial detection, as early as possible, of the likelihood that a disaster 
will occur.

• Origination of the warning process as early as practicable, bearing 
in mind that false or unnecessary warning must be avoided. In this 
regard, however, precautions can be built into the warning sequence 
by ensuring that, where doubt exists, only key ofﬁcials are initially 
informed.

• Effective means of transmitting warning information.
• Facilities to receive and assess warning information.
• Response decisions, as a result of assessing warning information.
• Dissemination of response decisions and, as appropriate, broadcast 

of warning information to the public.

As indicated in Chapter 16, preliminary reaction to warning, before a disaster 
actually strikes, can save lives and property. This preliminary reaction might 
include:

• closing of schools, ofﬁces, and other public places;
• checking emergency power supplies and similar facilities;
• 

taking precautions in households to ensure supplies of food; and 
drinking water.

It is reemphasized that preliminary reaction of this kind usually needs to be 
planned beforehand and, where necessary, the relevant information passed to 
disaster-related organizations and the public.

(See also Appendix B for further information on warning and warning systems.)

29. Evacuation

The evacuation of communities, groups or individuals is a frequent 

requirement during response operations. Evacuation is usually:

• precautionary (in most cases undertaken on warning indicators 
prior to impact to protect disaster-threatened persons from the full 
effects of the disaster)
or

Response 

239

• post-impact (to move persons from a disaster-stricken area into 

safer, better surroundings and conditions).

The question of evacuation is a complex one which involves a wide 

range of factors. It is therefore covered in detail in the annex to this chapter.

30. Activation of the Response System

For rapid and effective response, there usually needs to be a system 
for activating disaster management ofﬁcials and resource organizations. It 
is useful to implement activation in stages. These might be Alert, Stand-by, 
and Action, as suggested in Chapter 12. The beneﬁt of this arrangement is 
that if, after the initial warning, the disaster does not materialize, activation 
can be called off. Thus, full mobilization of resources can be avoided and the 
minimum of disruption is caused to normal life. It is advisable for government 
departments and other resource organizations to work to this system of stages 
in their own internal plans.

31. Coordination of Response Operations

 Coordination of the action taken in response operations is very 
important. Good coordination ensures that resource organizations are utilized 
to best effect, therefore avoiding gaps or duplication in operational tasks.

Appropriate emergency operations centers are essential for achieving effective 
management and accurate decision making.

Also, appropriate disaster management committees (usually at national, 
intermediate, and local government levels) are necessary to ensure that, as 
far as possible, there is overall coordination in decision making and in the 
allocation of tasks.

32. Communications

As with all aspects of disaster management, good communications are 
essential for effective response. Also, since communications may be adversely 
affected by disaster impact, reserve communications (with their own power 
supplies) are a necessary part of response arrangements. The value of solar-
powered communications, especially under severe disaster conditions, can be 
considerable.

240 Disaster Management

33. Survey and Assessment

(See also Appendix C of this handbook)

It is virtually impossible to carry out effective response operations 
without an accurate survey of damage and consequent assessment of relief and 
other needs. To be fully effective, survey and assessment needs to be carefully 
planned and organized beforehand. It usually calls for:

survey from the air,
survey by ﬁeld teams, and

• 
• 
• accurate reporting from disaster management and other ofﬁcial 

authorities in or near the disaster area.

In most cases, a general survey needs to be made as early as possible after 
impact, with follow-up surveys as necessary. Some training is usually required 
for personnel who are required to carry out survey and assessment duties. 
This is necessary to ensure the accuracy of information which is collected. 
The information gathered through survey and assessment is, of course, vitally 
important for the implementation of immediate relief measures. However, much 
of the information is also required for the formulation of recovery programs.

34. 

Information Management

In the confused circumstances which tend to exist following disaster 
impact, it is not easy to obtain accurate and complete information. However, 
without accurate and comprehensive information, it is difﬁcult to ensure 
that response operations are focussed on the correct tasks, in the right order 
of priority.

As stated in paragraph 31 above (in relation to coordination) emergency 
operations centers are essential for effective information management. Especially, 
EOCs ensure that information is correctly processed according to the proven 
cycle of:

• acquisition of information,
• 
information assessment,
• decision making, and
• dissemination of decisions and information.

Therefore, even if there are limitations in obtaining information, the 

EOC system will make the best use of what is available.

Response 

241

35. Major Emergency Response Aspects

Following the impact of disaster, there are usually varying degrees 
of damage to, or destruction of, the systems which support everyday life. 
Communities therefore need help (usually urgently) to subsist through the 
emergency phase and beyond. Key aspects of this assistance include:

• Rescue

To rescue persons who may be trapped in buildings and under 
debris, isolated by ﬂoodwaters, or need rescuing for any other 
reason.

• Treatment and care of victims
To dispose of the dead.
To render ﬁrst aid.
To ensure identiﬁcation tagging of casualties.
To identify needs in terms of medical treatment, hospitalization, 
and medical evacuation; and to deal with these accordingly.

• Evacuation

To determine whether persons need to be evacuated from the 
stricken area immediately, or whether such a requirement is likely 
to arise later.

• Shelter

To provide shelter for victims whose housing has been destroyed or 
rendered unusable. This may involve:
– making urgent repairs to some housing,
– 

issuing tents and/or tarpaulins to provide means of temporary 
shelter, and

– accomodating groups of homeless people in community 

buildings such as schools.

• Food

To organize and distribute food to disaster victims and emergency 

workers.

To estimate damage to crops and food stocks.
To estimate food reserves and available (including unharvested 

crops).

• Communications

To reestablish essential radio, telephone, telex, and facsimile links.

242 Disaster Management

• Clearance and access

To clear key roads, airﬁelds, and ports to allow access for vehicles, 
aircraft, and shipping; also to prepare helicopter landing sites.

• Water and power supplies

To reestablish water and power supplies, or to make temporary 
arrangements for them. Providing potable water is often difﬁcult, 
particularly in the early post-impact stages. Water-purifying 
equipment might therefore have to be obtained and/or water-
purifying tablets issued.

• Temporary subsistence supplies

To provide supplies such as clothing, disaster kits, cooking utensils, 
and plastic sheeting, to enable victims to subsist temporarily in their 
own area, thus helping reduce the need for evacuation.

• Health and sanitation

To take measures to safeguard the health of people in the stricken 
area and to maintain reasonable sanitation facilities.

• Public Information

To keep the stricken community informed on what they should do, 
especially in terms of self-help, and on what action is on hand to 
help them.
To prevent speculation and rumor concerning the future situation.

• Security

To maintain law and order, especially to prevent looting and 
unnecessary damage.

• Construction requirements

To estimate high-priority building repair and replacement 
requirements.

• Disaster welfare inquiry

To make arrangements to handle national and international inquiries 
concerning the welfare of citizens and residents, including tracing 
of missing persons.

• Maintenance of public morale

Depending on cultural and other local circumstances, to make 
arrangements for counseling and spiritual support of the stricken 

Response 

243

community. This may involve religious bodies, welfare agencies, 
and other appropriate organizations.

• Other requirements

Depending on individual circumstances, other requirements, 
additional to those above, may arise.

36. Allocation of Tasks

If planning and preparedness have been properly carried out, the 
majority of response tasks, as outlined in the foregoing paragraph, will have 
been designated beforehand to appropriate government departments and 
other resource organizations. For instance:

• Public works department to undertake debris clearance tasks, etc.
• Medical and health department to implement health and sanitation 

measures.

• Police to maintain law and order, and to assist with control of people 

and vehicles around the disaster area.

• Red Cross to carry out ﬁrst aid and other emergency welfare assistance.

The disaster management authority may need to give attention to tasks such 
as emergency feeding and emergency shelter programs, since these tend not 
to be in the normal day-to-day schedules of government departments and 
other organizations.

Priorities for the implementation of response tasks are usually decided by 
the appropriate level of disaster committee. These priorities may have to be 
changed frequently and both disaster management authorities and resource 
organizations need to be capable of accepting and implementing such changes.

37. Availability of Relief Supplies and Commodities

The ready availability of relief supplies and commodities is an important 
factor in effective response. After disaster impact, there is usually an urgent 
need to provide and distribute:

food,

• 
• drinking water,
• clothing,
• 
• medical supplies and assistance.

shelter materials, and

244 Disaster Management

Disaster management action therefore needs to cover two main areas:
• Obtaining the various commodities from government stores, 
emergency stockpiles, commercial supplies, and international 
assistance sources; and

• Organizing the distribution of these commodities according to the 

best possible orders of priority.

38. 

International Assistance Resources

International assistance resources often play a valuable part in response 
operations. These resources mainly comprise relief commodities, especially 
food, shelter, and medical supplies. However, specialist personnel and 
equipment are also available for damage survey and similar tasks. Disaster 
management authorities responsible for response operations should also bear 
in mind that some international agencies and countries hold stockpiles of relief 
supplies conveniently situated around the world. Access to such stockpiles 
may be extremely valuable in times of urgent need.

39. Public Cooperation

Good cooperation between the disaster response authorities and the 
public is essential if response operations are to be successful. The foundation 
of such cooperation should, of course, be laid during the public awareness 
programs which are a necessary part of preparedness. However, disaster 
response and coordinating authorities should remember that the affected public 
needs to be kept informed (see also paragraph 35 above). This particularly 
applies to intended response action and the timing of relief supplies.

If the affected public is not kept as fully informed as possible, rumors and false 
reports are likely to be started, thus causing problems of cooperation for the 
response authorities.

40. Media Cooperation

Disaster, especially major disaster, is news. Consequently, requests 
for information by local and international media are inevitable. Thus, it is 
clearly advisable to have well-organized arrangements to deal with this aspect. 
These arrangements are usually outlined in plans and standard operating 
procedures, and they are responsibilities of government information and 
broadcasting agencies (see Chapter 8 on counter-disaster resources). It is 
important that conditions in the stricken nation be accurately reported 
internationally and that there should be no misreporting or misrepresentation 

Response 

245

of international assistance effort. Most disaster events will be superseded 
by other happenings on the world scene in a fairly short time. Therefore, 
to avoid possible misunderstandings and misinterpretations, it is important 
to give media representatives appropriate opportunities to be briefed and to 
gather information as soon as possible after disaster impact. Delays may lead 
to some media representatives making their own news, which may not be in 
the best interests of the affected nation. Good relations with the local media 
are also important and usually two-way beneﬁts are involved. Not only do 
the local media beneﬁt from good cooperation from the disaster management 
authority, but they can also perform valuable services in roles such as warning, 
evacuation, and public awareness.

It is recognized that during pressurized response operations, disaster 
management authorities may regard media information as having to take a 
low priority. However, this should and can be avoided if proper arrangements 
are in place and appropriate use is made of specialist information staff.

41. Pattern of Response Management

It is important, especially in the interests of operational coherence, that 
disaster managers should try to develop and maintain a pattern of management 
during response operations.

As stated in Chapter 4, which deals with major requirements for coping with 
disaster, resource management depends on four major factors:

• A capable EOC system;
• A good information picture;
• Effective communication between the disaster management and 

individual resource organizations; and

• Sensible commitment of resource organizations to operational tasks, 

bearing in mind their capability and durability.

Given that these factors can be applied, it is useful if the response 

management authority works to a pattern of:

• Maintaining the best possible information picture (from surveys, 
situation reports, and other information) concerning the disaster 
situation and the tasks which may need to be undertaken;

• Establishing priorities for tasks;
• Committing resources to tasks in the most effective manner, bearing in 
mind that personnel need time for meals and reasonable rest periods.

246 Disaster Management

• Continuously assessing the situation in terms of:

tasks completed
tasks needing to be undertaken,
resources available,

– 
– 
– 
– possible reinforcement by additional resources, etc.

• Maintaining close liaison with other relevant disaster management 
authorities (e.g., committees at higher and lower government 
levels);

• Maintaining close liaison with NGOs;
• Keeping the public as fully informed as practicable; and
• Using self-help from within the community.

42. Period of Response Operations

Wide international experience indicates that most governments ﬁnd 
it expedient to keep the period of emergency response operations down to a 
fairly limited period. This period usually tends to be 2–3 weeks, after which 
remaining relief and associated needs are met through the normal systems 
and processes of government. Undue extension of the emergency is usually 
regarded as undesirable to avoid:

• overdependence on emergency aid (especially food supplies),
• adverse effects on the local commercial system, and
• unnecessary delay in returning to normal community life.

It may be useful, therefore, for disaster managers to bear this likely time frame 
in mind in formulating their overall concept of response operations.

Follow-on from Response Operations

From the contents of the foregoing sections of this chapter, it is clear 
43. 
that response operations will usually constitute a short, pressurized period 
of activity. The major aims of disaster management during this period can be 
summarized as follows:

• To encounter the initial effects of disaster impact as rapidly and 

effectively as possible;

• To use all suitable resources in a coordinated manner;
• To provide urgent needs to stricken communities; and
• To rehabilitate, as far as possible, those facilities and systems which 
are of priority importance to the functioning of the national system 
and way of life.

Response 

247

44. The emergency response period is therefore a transient one. It does not 
have a deﬁnite cut-off point in terms of national and community requirement. 
Indeed, from a disaster manager’s viewpoint, the period is best regarded as a 
vital bridge between the shock and disruption caused by disaster impact and 
the organized process of returning to normal. This means that, following the 
ofﬁcial ending of the emergency phase, there will be a need to:

• continue certain relief activities (e.g., emergency feeding);
• convert some of these relief activities into more formal types of 
rehabilitation programs (e.g., it may become necessary for the stricken 
nation to establish a long-term community assistance program);
• extend some temporary measures (e.g., the emergency clearance and 
repair of port facilities) into major programs of restoration; and
• assess all post-emergency phase activities and requirement and 

coordinate them into an overall recovery program.

45. 
Before the recovery program can be fully implemented (and this may 
take several months) there tends to be a somewhat blurred period. Many 
people who have been directly involved in disaster situations have cited this 
period as the most difﬁcult of all in disaster management. Disaster managers 
should be aware that this period is likely to arise following most disasters and 
that it tends to be caused by the following:

• ending of emergency powers which usually apply during response 

• 

operations;
transfer of responsibility from the central disaster management 
authority (i.e., NDC) back to individual government departments;
• necesssary continuance of relief activities by NGOs, whether or not 

government agencies are involved;

• addition of many disaster-caused problems to the normal 
workload of most government, nongovernment, and private sector 
organizations; and
residual social and psychological problems which are likely to exist 
within the community following the disaster.

• 

46. 
It is to overcome this difﬁcult blurred period that some governments 
have deemed it advisable to use a technical advisory team during the emergency 
response period. The main purpose of such team (while standing aside from 
the emergency response operations) has been to identify the strands of relief, 
rehabilitation, and restoration which emerge post-disaster and bring these 
strands together for integration into the total recovery program (see Chapter 4). 
In this way, response operations, emergency relief, initial rehabilitation 

248 Disaster Management

programs which constitute the total recovery process. These threads are picked 
up and continued in Chapter 19 on recovery.

Human Factors in Response

47. 
The turbulence and pressures of response operations do not usually 
allow much opportunity for coping in detail with the trauma inﬂicted on 
communities and individuals. Obviously, extreme cases have be dealt with by 
medical attention and associated counseling, but generally this activity tends to 
fall within recovery programs. However, disaster management ofﬁcials should 
understand that many human factors are involved during response operations. 
This understanding can materially assist in the assessment of various situations 
and in decision making. In brief, the main factors tend to be:

• The plight of disaster victims

In extreme disaster circumstances, the plight of disaster victims is 
severe and traumatic. Shock, personal injury, bereavement, loss, 
turmoil, and other aspects have a severe effect on the capability of 
victims to comprehend their circumstances, to realize what is being 
done for them in disaster management terms and to cooperate in a 
meaningful and positive way in their own relief and rehabilitation. It 
is true that extended family members and persons from neighboring 
community areas will usually be available to provide assistance of 
various kinds. But severely affected victims themselves constitute 
a response liability which disaster managers must recognize. In 
less severe disaster circumstances where community members are 
capable of providing some coherent self-help, the situation may be 
more encouraging. However, disaster managers must still recognize 
that unless levels of community preparedness and experience 
are high, there may well be problems of organizing self-help in a 
productive way.

• The nature of the counter-disaster task

The nature of the counter-disaster task also involves human 
considerations in most circumstances. The nature of response 
operations can make heavy physical and mental demands on 
emergency workers. This may well result in lowered functional 
capacity of resource organizations.

• The worker/family factor

Disaster circumstances will very often result in some emergency 
workers being separated from their families, with consequent fear 

Response 

249

and apprehension on both sides. Indeed, cases are known where, 
for instance, volunteer ﬁreﬁghters have been engaged in trying to 
save the community as a whole, while their own families were being 
put at risk and their homes and properties destroyed. This is clearly 
a disaster management factor which is difﬁcult to handle and one 
which can only be mitigated according to local events. However, 
disaster managers need to be aware of it and to be prepared to 
resolve it as best as possible.

• The transfer factor

As indicated above and in Chapter 12 on plans, the impact of 
disaster can affect both victims and emergency workers. However, 
an additional factor needs to be taken into account. This is the 
transfer of trauma effects from the disaster victims to the emergency 
worker. This can particularly apply when emergency workers are 
inexperienced volunteers and are exposed to disaster trauma for 
the ﬁrst time. For instance, a case is known where welfare workers, 
distributing food to disaster victims, were so badly affected by the 
latter’s suffering that they themselves became unable to continue 
this important response task.

Resources Relevant to Various Aspects of Response

48. Disaster circumstances, particularly if they are severe, are likely to 
require response from the widest possible range of resources. This may even 
include people who have themselves become victim. Given below are the main 
categories of resources which are, therefore, applicable to response.

Resources capable of assisting in the deﬁnition of response requirement and the type 
of operations required to deal with them

• disaster study and research institutions;
• disaster management authorities; and
• disaster records, especially of post-disaster review and analysis.

Resource organizations primarily concerned with direction, coordination, and 
management of response operations

• national disaster management authority;
• 
• 
• 

regional or provincial disaster committees;
special task forces;
self-contained international assistance teams.

250 Disaster Management

Resource organizations which provide support for management and direction by 
providing specialist information and advice

• meteorological services;
• geological services;
• 
• 

technical advisory services; and
specialists in various other ﬁelds, as required.

Resource organizations which carry out allotted tasks in response operations

• 

standard emergency services (police, ﬁre, authorities, ambulance 
services, etc.);

• government departments, organizations, and agencies;
• military services;
• NGOs, including welfare agencies, religious bodies, and a wide 

range of community services;

• emergency task force teams;
• 
• community self-help teams.

international assistance teams; and

Response 

251

Annex to Chapter 17

NOTES ON EVACUATION

Introduction

1. 
The evacuation of disaster-affected communities can be one of the most 
difﬁcult of response operations. As stated in paragraph 29 of this chapter, 
evacuation is usually:

• precautionary (in most cases undertaken on warning indicators prior 
to impact to protect disaster-threatened persons from the full effects 
of the disaster); or
 post-impact (to move persons from a disaster-stricken area into safer, 
better surroundings and conditions).

• 

In either case, the decision to evacuate is based on a number of factors, some of 
which tend to be conﬂicting. Thus, disaster managers who are faced with the 
evacuation decision need to have a sound understanding of what is involved.

Purpose

2. 
The purpose of this annex, therefore, is to outline some major 
considerations which affect the decision to evacuate individuals, groups, and 
communities who may be affected by the impact of disaster.

The Disaster Threat

3. 
One outstanding factor which relates to evacuation is a clear and 
detailed understanding of the disaster threat. If evacuation decision makers 
do not fully understand the ramiﬁcations of the threat, it is unlikely (if not 
impossible) that they will make accurate decisions. Also, of course, various 
aspects of the threat (such as speed of onset and warning lead time) may bear 
directly and critically on the decision to evacuate.

4. 

Some relevant aspects of the disaster threat are summarized below:
• Nature

The nature of the threat raises different problems and varying 
evacuation alternatives. For instance, a simple move to higher 

252 Disaster Management

ground may be the evacuation solution to moderate ﬂooding. 
Bushﬁre, on the other hand, can pose very difﬁcult evacuation 
problems; in what direction, for example, is it safe to move ? In 
cyclonic conditions, there is nearly always the problem of ﬂying 
debris, which can pose a hazard to movement and even to life.

• Severity

The severity of the threat may increase or decrease the likelihood 
of evacuation.

• Frequency

The frequency of the threat affects readiness levels and mental 
attitudes. A frequent threat may also provide valuable experience in 
the evacuation decision making.

• Predictability

A high level of predictability in relation to the threat considerably 
helps in the accuracy of decision making.

• Speed of onset

This usually bears strongly on warning lead time and on time 
available to implement successful evacuation.

• 

Impact effect
Very sudden and severe impact (such as that of ﬂash ﬂooding) 
usually makes organized evacuation difﬁcult. However, it will 
almost certainly cause self-evacuation.

• Compound effect

Some types of disaster may give rise to compound effects. For 
instance, heavy rains may cause serious ﬂoods and create the need 
to evacuate. However, rain may also cause landslides or mudslides 
which impede evacuation movement.

• Extent

An extensive, widespread disaster may create a “nowhere-to-go” 
situation. This may mean that local safe havens become the only 
alternative.
• Past experience

Records of past experience in evacuation can offer useful guidelines 
for the future.

Response 

253

The foregoing brief summary illustrates the importance of the disaster threat 
in relation to evacuation considerations. In fact, if disaster managers do not 
understand the threat, it is doubtful if they can begin to think seriously 
about evacuation.

General Disaster Management Factors

A number of general disaster management factors also bear signiﬁcantly 

5. 
on the evacuation problem. These are outlined below.

6. 

Plans

The basis of planning is an important factor because it usually provides 
guidance, at least in general terms, on major aspects of disaster management 
such as evacuation. For instance:

• Provincial disaster plans are likely to deﬁne evacuation arrangements 

in general terms.

• Local disaster plans should normally deﬁne warning arrangements and 
specify safe havens and, perhaps, options for evacuation routes.

• Special plans may exist in areas which necessitate evacuation.

Therefore, plans usually provide a starting point for tackling evacuation 

problems.

7. 

Preparedness Measures

In a well-prepared community, readiness measures which likely bear 
directly on evacuation; for instance, arrangements to prevent (by sand bagging 
and other means) the breaching of river banks in times of ﬂoods. This type of 
preparedness can reduce the need for evacuation.

8. 

Public Awareness

A community that has a high level of awareness, combined with 
preparedness, tends to be much more attuned to possible evacuation than a 
community which is complacent. Also, if good public awareness is prompted, 
at least in part, by previous experience of evacuation (or even evacuation 
standby), then future evacuations will usually be easier to handle.

254 Disaster Management

9. 

Legislation

Usually, disaster legislation covers certain aspects of evacuation. These 
include responsibilities for decision making. The rights of individuals not to 
be evacuated, if they so choose, are also sometimes covered.

10. Disaster Management System

It is extremely difﬁcult, if not impossible, to make an accurate evacuation 
decision without some form of disaster management system; that is, without 
the support of:

• Viable communications;
• Provision of warning and other relevant information;
• Facilities for information management (e.g., EOCs);
• Means of disseminating information to the public, and so on.

In other words, the system must provide for two critical needs:

• First, accurate and timely information on which to make the 

evacuation decision.

• Second, timely, accurate, and clear dissemination to the community 

of this decision to evacuate.

11. Other background or general 
circumstances, but those mentioned above tend to be the most usual ones.

factors may apply 

in differing 

Special Evacuation Factors

In addition to the foregoing general factors, certain special evacuation 

12. 
factors affect the evacuation decision.

13. Vulnerability

One such factor is the vulnerability of an area or community. Such 
vulnerability needs to be established through speciﬁc analysis and, in this 
process, disaster records, history, and experience all play a part. The number 
of people at risk is also a relevant factor and where relative vulnerability can 
be assessed (for instance, from possible ﬂood levels relative to population 
distribution), this is also useful.

Response 

255

14. 

Speed of Onset

As already mentioned, speed of onset is another key evacuation factor. 

For instance, there is a vast difference:

• between an earthquake and a slowly developing tropical cyclone;
• between a ﬂash ﬂood and a ﬂood which may take days (if not weeks) 

to build up in a major river system;

• between a controllable narrow-fronted bushﬁre and a rapidly moving 
ﬁre which has been whipped up by a sudden, severe wind change.

15. Warning Time

Warning time is, of course, closely connected with speed of disaster 
onset. Obviously, from the examples quoted in the foregoing paragraph, the 
following alternatives are produced:

long warning,
short warning, and

• 
• 
• no warning at all.

These alternatives in warning time are critically important for decision making 
and for the implementation of evacuation itself.

16. Methods of Warning

Methods of warning have signiﬁcant ramiﬁcations for both the decision- 

making authority and for the threatened community.

The decision-making authority’s needs are to ensure:
• First, that the warning gets to all persons to whom it applies;
• Second, that it gets there as quickly as possible;
• Third, that it is given in a clear, understandable, and unambiguous 

manner; and

• Fourth, that there are alternative methods, in case of failure of 

disruption.

For the community, it is important to know beforehand how warnings are 
likely to be transmitted. Also, the community needs to know how it can best 
“plug into” the warning system.

Methods of issuing warning can vary. They include radio or television 
broadcast, loud hailer, siren, ﬂags, word of mouth, and so on.

256 Disaster Management

17. 

Interpretation of Warning

Correct interpretation of warning is also critical. For the community, 
the simple questions are: “What precisely does the warning mean and what 
are we required to do ?” If there are any doubts about the answers to these 
questions, then the warning system is inaccurate or inadequate, or both.

Doubt in the community’s mind about what it should do could have, quite 
literally, lethal results.

18. Cancellation of Warning

There also needs to be some method of cancelling warning, if necessary. 

Again, the provisions stated in paragraph 17 will apply.

19. Movement Capability

Movement capability is yet another key factor for successful evacuation. 
Two widely differing sets of circumstances illustrate this. In the southern 
United States which are regularly affected by hurricanes, self-movement is a 
standard process. Local residents, who usually possess one or two cars, can 
move themselves and their important personal belongings to safety. All they 
need to do is to drive north up the nearest convenient highway. By contrast, 
people living in the southern delta region of Bangladesh have very limited 
transport resources. They therefore have to rely on government-provided 
measures (e.g., cyclone shelters) as a way of mitigating the impact of regular 
cyclone and storm surges. The consistently sad record of casualties shows the 
limitations involved. The harsh, basic fact here is that if people cannot move, 
or be moved, there is no point in making an evacuation decision. This may 
be well a situation in which, under extreme circumstances, disaster managers 
could ﬁnd themselves.

20. Movement Control and Coordination

The control and coordination of evacuation movement also need careful 

consideration, both in planning and execution. Some of the key factors are:

• Numbers of people involved;
• Types of transport used(land, air, sea/river);
• Number of vehicles, aircraft, etc;
• Designation of routes, and alternative routes if necessary;
• Necessity for enroute stops;
• 

Identiﬁcation of movement coordinating staff;

Response 

257

• Enroute communications; and
• Feeding and refuelling arrangements.

21. 

Reception Requirements

A great deal of care usually needs to be given to arrangements for 
the reception of evacuees. People who have been uprooted from their own 
environment, particularly at short notice and in dangerous conditions, are 
bound to be under some measure of stress. Aspects of reception which need 
to be covered are:

Inquiries (e.g., from relatives);

• General care, welfare accomodation;
• Registration;
• 
• Feeding;
• Medical and health arrangements;
• Communication with the evacuation authority;
• Assurance of security for evacuated homes and property; and
• Evacuee self-help, where possible.

Reception is perhaps the most sensitive part of the total evacuation 
process. It can have many sociological and psychological repercussions; and it 
usually calls for expert advice on many of its aspects.

22. Arrangements for Return

Evacuation plans also need to include arrangements for the return of 
evacuees to their home areas; or alternatively, in extreme cases, relocation to 
other areas.

Case Study Information

23. Case studies of various evacuations have produced some interesting 
slants on the problems involved. Some of these are quoted brieﬂy below.

• Unnecessary evacuation

Several cases have been recorded where precautionary evacuation 
proved to be unnecessary. Such cases usually produce considerable 
discontent in both evacuees and recipient communities. In some 
instances, evacuee groups have deﬁed ofﬁcial regulations and 
returned to their home areas.

258 Disaster Management

• 

Incompatibility
Incompatibility of evacuees with their surroundings, and vice versa, 
has also been a recurring theme. This arises particularly when 
evacuees are forcibly billetted on families in the recipient areas, or 
among communities of a different religion or culture.

• Resistance to relocation

Evacuation which develops into permanent relocation can also 
prove troublesome. The roots of people to tribal or traditional land 
can go very deep indeed. This has led to rejection of new land 
allocation and return to former living areas, even though the latter 
may have been badly affected by salination (from storm surge) or 
similar disaster causes.

• 

Inadequate shelter accommodation
There is a good deal of evidence of precautionary evacuations 
resulting in large numbers of people being sheltered in structurally 
inadequate accommodation; for instance, churches or community 
halls. Subsequent buildings collapses, under cyclonic of storm 
conditions, have caused considerable loss of life.

Summary

24. 
The need for evacuation is likely to be a constantly recurring one in 
disaster circumstances. Whether there is long warning, no warning, or short 
warning, disaster managers should be able to handle the evacuation process with 
reasonable effectiveness. However, evacuation efforts are likely to go wrong:

• 

• 
• 

• 

If there has been insufﬁcient study and analysis of the disaster 
threat;
If preparedness levels are inadequate;
If disaster-prone communities are attuned to the possibilities (and 
the risks) of evacuation; and
If everyone, including the community, is not absolutely clear about 
the responsibility for decision making and the evacuation process.

The problems of evacuation are clear. So are the various factors involved. 
They have been spelled out in practical terms over many years. Therefore, if 
the requirements are followed, there seems very little reason why evacuation 
failure should occur.

Chapter 18

Logistics

Purpose

1. 
The purpose of this chapter is to outline some major factors which apply 
to logistics in disaster management. Logistics constitute a primary component 
of response operations (which are discussed in Chapter 17).

The chapter includes:

• A general description of logistics;
• The importance and place of logistics in disaster management;
• Response aspects;
• Recovery aspects;
• Preparedness requirements; and
• Some management, administrative, and accounting considerations.

2. 
The chapter does not cover the logistic aspects of major refugee operations 
of famine relief. These can be found in the Handbook for Emergencies issued 
by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR).

General Description of Logistics

3. 

Logistics have been described as the procurement and delivery of

the right supplies,
• 
in the right quantities,
• 
in the right order,
• 
• 
in good condition,
• at the right place, and
• at the right time.

It is interesting to note that before the word logistics came into wide international 
usage (principally in the military ﬁeld during World War II) an alternative 
term was sometimes “supplies and transport.” These two latter activities, in 

260 Disaster Management

fact, constitute the major components of logistics as currently applied to disaster 
management. They are certainly the two activities which are likely to be of 
most direct and practical concern to the majority of disaster managers.

The Importance and Place of Logistics 
in Disaster Management

logistics are of primary 

In line with the foregoing description and as stated in paragraph 
4. 
1, 
importance during response operations. 
However, they also play a key role in recovery programs (see Chapter 19). 
Consequently, logistic considerations need to be taken fully into account 
during preparedness assessments.

Response Aspects

5. 
In the context of response operations, logistics are especially important 
in three interrelated areas. These are outlined below and one particular 
characteristic concerning them needs to be emphasized. This is the urgency 
which applies to them all. This indicates that areas such as prior planning 
and organization must receive due attention and underlines the importance of 
preparedness measures generally.

6. 

Fulﬁllment of Operational Tasks

Operational response tasks usually require a considerable amount of 
movement by land, sea, inland waterways, and air; and action by counter-
disaster units and teams, much of which may be carried out on a deployed 
task-force basis.

These response tasks require the use of various forms of operational capability, 
usually in the form of vehicles, boats, and aircraft. They also require the 
availability and use of various forms of supplies. Such supplies may include:

• Petrol, oil, and lubricants;
• Technical spare and repair parts (depending on circumstances, 
these may have to cover a wide range of items to cope with vehicles, 
aircraft, communications systems, and similar requirements);

• Personnel subsistence and support commodities, including food, 

medical and health items, tents, and so on; and

Logistics 

261

• Administrative items of various kinds; for instance, standard report 
forms and other requirements for survey and assessment if this type 
of operational activity is likely to be involved.

7. 

Procurement and Distribution of Relief Commodities

The procurement and distribution of relief commodities may involve 

heavy demands on commodities and transport, as illustrated below.

Commodities
In severe disaster conditions, demands on relief commodities are likely 
to be very heavy indeed. However, in all circumstances, it is advisable 
to restrict distribution to a reasonable minimum. This is prudent in 
the community. It is therefore appropriate to restrict items to the well-
recognized essentials of food, clothing, shelter, and medical necessities. 
This type of frugal management approach also helps achieve a 
streamlined, and thus more effective, logistic operation. Nonetheless, 
providing essential commodities is not likely to be problem free.

In small countries especially, preparedness stockpiling (even if it is feasible 
at all) is unlikely to meet operational needs fully. Emergency procurement 
is therefore likely to be a part of the overall logistics role. Indeed, this 
is likely to apply to many larger countries as well. One comment on 
procurement which often arises (particularly in post-disaster review) is 
that not enough use is made of in-country sources of supply. This largely 
arises because, under emergency conditions, it often seems easier and 
quicker to accept and utilize international input. This point is one which 
needs to be resolved, at least as far as possible, during preparedness 
action. Thus, as a preparedness measure, sources for emergency 
procurement need to be earmarked by disaster management authorities, 
usually from within the local wholesale/retail food chain; local and export 
manufacturing capability (e.g., for rice, tinned ﬁsh, biscuits); special 
agricultural sources (such as possible emergency harvesting of certain 
crops); and government stockpiles of items such as medical supplies.

In the context of response operations, however, it needs to be borne in 
mind that loss of commodities may occur because of disaster impact.

Disaster management authorities therefore need to keep an ongoing 
operational check of the balance between:

• assessment of commodity needs (as progressively updated by survey 

and assessment action),

262 Disaster Management

• availability and timing of local (in-country) commodities, and
• availability and timing of international assistance supplies.

Transport and Transport Systems
The availability of transport and the serviceability of transport systems 
obviously constitute a key factor in the effective distribution of relief 
commodities. Some considerations which are likely to apply include:

• Loss and/or damage inﬂicted by the disaster;
• Flexibility in transport capacity and systems, especially the ability 
to switch resources from unaffected areas to disaster-stricken areas;
• Ability to procure transport resources by requisitioning and/or 

charter;

• Difﬁculties of transport access to some stricken areas because of 
remoteness, severed communications, or various severe disaster effects;
• Limitations or beneﬁts resulting from preparedness; for instance, 
earmarking (or otherwise) of emergency transport capability in 
plans and departmental standard operating procedures;

• Types of transport available (for instance, remote mountain areas, 
or areas which are isolated by disaster effects, cannot be supplied 
unless airlift/airdrop capability is available; limited four-wheel drive 
capability may also be a restrictive factor); and

• Assistance from international resources, which can augment in-
country transport capability or temporarily make good unserviceable 
portions of such capability.

It is noteworthy that, in many disaster situations, the withdrawal (for 
whatever reasons) of international transport assistance (e.g., helicopters 
or aircraft capable of operating off short airstrip) nearly always causes a 
marked decline in supply capability, albeit for a temporary period only.

A major consideration which may help disaster managers in the 
transportation of supplies is the optimum use of self-help from stricken 
communities. For instance, in many cases it has been found expedient 
to deliver bulk supplies (by boat or airdrop) to various convenient 
points from which they can then be collected by responsible community 
representatives or groups. This presupposes, of course, that:

• adequate communication can be established between the disaster 
management authority and the stricken communities; also that

Logistics 

263

• 

such communities still remain a basis of local government or 
traditional leadership and authority.

8. 

International Assistance Activity

From a logistics viewpoint, international assistance activities involve 

important factors. For example:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

International assistance usually boosts the availability of much-
needed relief commodities, provided liaison between the stricken 
country and international funding agencies has ensured the 
preclusion of unnecessary relief items.
If, however, good liaison is not maintained, inappropriate and often 
useless items may be sent. This can be a serious liability, since the 
 in-country supply system may become choked and valuable local 
resources may have to be developed to sort usable commodities from 
recipients to ensure that inappropriate supplies (e.g., unacceptable 
foodstuffs) are made known to funding agencies.
International assistance can provide additional transport capability, 
especially of the emergency kind such as helicopter lift and four-
wheel drive vehicles.
International assistance may also be invaluable in the handling and 
distribution of supplies.
International relief input usually places additional demands on the 
 in-country logistic system. This may be a crucial factor if major 
ports, airﬁelds, roads and railways have had their capacity reduced 
by disaster effects. Extra demands may also be placed on fuel and 
food stocks by visiting aircraft and various relief teams.
In the interests of both the stricken country and the international 
assistance agency, it is important that no undue delays are imposed on 
international inputs by delays from customs or similar formalities.

From the foregoing points, it is clear that international assistance activities, 
while contributing many invaluable beneﬁts, may also impose logistic 
complications. Any such complications need to be minimized through prior 
planning and preparedness arrangements.

9. General

On response aspects, heavy demands can invariably be expected on:

264 Disaster Management

• movements capability, provided 

from both 

in-country and 

international sources;

• commodities required to provide relief for stricken communities; and
• commodities necessary to support response operations themselves.

Moreover, because of

• possible loss and/or downgrading of logistic capability (i.e., 

transport and supplies) due to disaster effects;

• urgency in response operations, especially to relieve hardship and 

suffering; and

• complications of integrating international assistance effort,

disaster managers are likely to be confronted with major problems of decision 
making, allocation of priorities, and coordination of logistics operations.

Recovery Aspects

10. Recovery programs, like response activities, have considerable logistics 
implications. In fact, if such programs are to be accurately identiﬁed and 
deﬁned, logistic capabilities and limitations must be taken into account 
throughout the total process of:

• Producing an adequate database from which to deﬁne various 
aspects of the recovery process (for instance, this database needs to 
include a general assessment, at least, of logistic requirements and 
available capability);

• Deﬁning the overall strategy for recovery and associated facets of 

national development;

• Determining the individual recovery programs within the overall 

• 

strategy; and
Implementing individual programs and projects on a well-managed 
and coordinated basis.

11. Recovery Program Assets

From a logistics angle, the recovery process offers certain assets when 

compared with response. For instance:

• Logistics aspects can be integrated into recovery programs with 

considerable certainty and reliability.

• Recovery programs and projects take place in more stable conditions.

Logistics 

265

• Less pressure and urgency are likely with regard to decision making 

and the implementation of projects.

• There is likely to be more time available for the management of 
commodities and supplies, the maintenance of transport and 
transport systems, and the conservation of personnel resources.

12. Recovery Program Liabilities

Conversely, recovery programs carry certain liabilities. These may include:

• A general downgrading on in-country logistics capability, caused by 
the heavy demands of response operations. This downgrading may 
be exacerbated by the post-disaster condition of roads and railways. 
Such downgrading may lead to a conﬂict of priorities between 
the need to rehabilitate roads and railways, and the urgency of 
recovery projects.

• The withdrawal or reduction of international assistance capability.
• The heavier logistics lift demands of recovery programs (for example, 
the movement of very large components such as bridge structures).

13. General

From a general recovery standpoint, logistics considerations are critically 
important. They have the same inﬂuence on programs and projects as, for 
example, availability of supplies and workforce capability. They therefore need 
to be reviewed as an integral component of such programs and projects.

Preparedness Requirements

14. 
It is evident from what has been said in paragraphs 5–13 above that 
considerable preparedness action has to be taken if the logistics demands of 
response and recovery are to be satisfactorily met.

15. Planning and Organization

First, there must be an adequate basis of planning and organization. 
Logistics can be a brittle component in response and recovery, particularly 
the former. This is because of the variable conditions and requirements which 
may apply. Therefore, anything that can be done through effective planning 
and organization to clarify, facilitate, and implement logistics action is likely 
to be invaluable. Also, given that logistics have to cover a wide range of 
possibilities, good planning, and organization can help minimize the risks of 
gaps and duplication.

266 Disaster Management

16. General Assessment of Logistics Capability

Within the foregoing general framework of planning and organization, 
it is then necessary to make a general assessment, in the preparedness sense, of 
logistic capability. This assessment should primarily take into account:

• Potential disaster scenarios and logistic needs;
• Vulnerability of logistic components (i.e., commodities, transport 

vehicles of various kinds, supply, and routes).

Such an assessment could be expected to give a reasonably accurate picture 
of how logistic aspects would apply to a particular disaster situation. For 
instance, in the case of major ﬂooding, a forecast could be made of:

• what supplies and transport facilities might be lost or cut off, and for 
what period (e.g., supplies inundated, roads cut or washed away);
• what areas would be accessible or inaccessible for supply purposes;
• what effects the evacuation of communities would have on logistic 
requirements, in terms of both evacuation movement and the 
subsequent supply of essential commodities to the evacuees;

• what special logistic items might need to be brought in to reinforce 
existing capability (e.g., special ﬂood boats for rescue and/or relief 
purposes);

• what preparedness and associated arrangements could be taken to 
safeguard logistic component, either by preventive arrangements 
(e.g., sand bagging) and/or relocation.

17. Cataloging of Logistic Tools

In conjunction with this suggested assessment, it is also necessary to 
categorize and record what might be termed the logistic tools to meet disaster 
situations. Examples of such major categories are given below:

Commodities likely to be needed
• Operational support items (e.g., fuel);
• Relief commodities (e.g., food, shelter, materials, clothing, medical 

• 

necessities, water puriﬁcation accessories); and
Items likely to be required for recovery programs (e.g., building 
materials).

Logistics 

267

Sources of supply
In paragraph 7 above, the following possible sources of supply were 
suggested for emergency procurement:
• 
• 
• 
• government stockpiles.

the local food chain,
local manufacturing sources, 
special agricultural sources, and

Other sources of supply include:
• Red Cross/Red Crescent which, in a number of countries, holds 
special disaster-related items, such as medical supplies, cooking 
utensils, tools, and special family kits.

• 

• NGOs, some of which may have special capabilities, such as the 
provision and erection of large temporary accommodation units;
International funding agencies, including service-type organizations 
(Lions, Rotary, Apex, etc.), which will undertake self-contained 
recovery projects, such as the rebuilding of schools or medical 
clinics.

Obviously, individual circumstances will differ with regard to sources of 
supply. Thus, disaster managers will need to adapt their own detailed 
approach from the above general suggestions. It is also worth noting 
that some supply problems can include the donation of:
• 
• 
• 
• out-of-date medicines and drugs.
(See also paragraph 8 above).

inappropriate items of food and clothing;
soiled, unsuitable items of various kinds;
food which is unﬁt for consumption; and

Storage
Storage requirements may include:
• Main bulk storage of a permanent nature (e.g., large government or 

commercial stores or warehouses);

• Bulk storage at major distribution points (e.g., in or adjacent to 
stricken areas). Such storage may need to be weatherproof and 
secure, especially if perishable and valuable items are involved.

Requisitioning of buildings may therefore be necessary or alternatively.
• Temporary storage (e.g., in port and airﬁeld areas) for stocks in transit;
• Temporary holding storage at forward distribution sites (e.g., 

advanced airstrips).

268 Disaster Management

Handling
Handling requirements at entry, storage, and transit points are also an 
important consideration. Needs may include forklifts, trolleys, cranes, 
and similar items. It is also important to ensure (by prearrangement 
if possible) that where manhandling is anticipated, packages can be 
handled by one person; failure or inability to take this kind of precaution 
can result in very wasteful use of available personnel.

Sources of transport
Possible sources of transport which need to be assessed on preparedness 
basis are:

• Road

Government transport capability;
Commercial transport, for charter or requisitioning;
Private vehicles, for charter or requisitioning; and
International agencies and contractors working on in-country 
projects.

• Rail

Government rail system, with assessment of haulage/movement 
capability.
Commercial light rail systems, if available, such as special industrial/
commercial links to and from ports (for sugarcane, woodcutting, or 
similar projects).
Inland waterways
River and canal shipping systems, with capabilities and restrictions.
Government and commercial craft;
Private craft, including local boats and canoes, which may provide 
vital transport to remote locations.
• Sea, coastal, and interisland shipping

• 

Government vessels;
Commercial vessels, for charter or requisitioning; and
Private craft (e.g., launches and motorboats).

• Air transport (ﬁxed wing and helicopters)

Government airlines or aircraft;
Commercial airlines and operators; and
Private aircraft.

In the above resources of transport, it is assumed that government 

categories would include military resources, as appropriate.

Logistics 

269

Factors affecting movement
Factors which may affect movement are:
• Availability of maps, charts, navigation aids, timetables, and similar 

information;

• Terminal and transit factors, such as port capacities/facilities, airﬁeld 
capacities, road states (including weather effects), bridge weight 
capacities, and so on.

Management, Administrative, and Accounting Considerations

It is evident from the foregoing that logistic activity is bound to involve 
18. 
management, administrative, and accounting considerations. These are 
summarized below.

19. Management considerations

Management must be primarily designed to achieve effective direction 
and coordination of logistic effort. This can be conveniently divided into 
operational and routine considerations.

• Operational considerations

In response operations, it is widely accepted that logistic aspects can 
be effectively integrated through the EOC (emergency operations 
center) system. As an example, the logistics desk in one national 
emergency operations center was given the following responsibilities:
– To receive, store, secure, transport, and distribute relief supplies.
– To coordinate supplies distributed directly by NGOs and other 

organizations.

– To ensure proper maintenance of vehicles and equipment.

In another case, logistic requirements were dealt with by:
– A supply and ﬁnance desk, plus
– Subdesks for road transport, air transport, and shipping.
Both these options worked satisfactorily and that disaster managers 
should use whatever detailed system is appropriate and compatible 
at all applicable levels of government (e.g., national, provincial, 
and local).

For recovery programs, it is usually possible to take a somewhat more 
general management approach. One example comprised:

270 Disaster Management

- A national Ofﬁce of Relief and Reconstruction, the roles of which 

included overall logistics management, plus

- The covering of provincial logistic requirements through normal 

government processes.

A second example consisted of:
- A national executive committee at the ministerial level;
- A support structure from the NDC and a special technical 
advisory team, which covered logistic requirement on behalf of 
the national executive committee, plus the covering of provincial 
logistic requirement through normal government process.

• Routine considerations

Routine logistic considerations (i.e., during nondisaster times) are 
normally the responsibility of individual government departments 
and NGOs. Counter-disaster plans, and more particularly standard 
operating procedures, should provide necessary guidelines 
covering both supplies and transport. (See also Chapter 13 on use 
of resources.) Routine management is also materially assisted if a 
national disaster management ofﬁce (or the equivalent) is given 
responsibility for assisting in the planning, organizational, and 
preparedness measures which relate to logistics.

20. Administration and Accounting

Logistic aspects usually involve heavy demands on administrative and 

accounting systems, mainly because of:

• procurement of commodities,
• charter and requisitioning of transport and other facilities,
• 
• 
• handling of international commodity inputs
• need to account accurately for in-country and international relief 

stock control during urgent relief operations,
recovery of equipment and tools issued for emergency operations,

fund donations,
special demands on national expenditure, and

• 
• other similar requirements.

It may therefore be advisable for governments to consider some or all of the 
following arrangements:

Logistics 

271

• 

• 

If counter-disaster legislation is implemented, it should cover the 
release of appropriate funds from national government resources.
In allocating responsibility for disaster management at the national 
and provincial levels (i.e., to ministers or provincial governors), the 
national government should specify what delegation of expenditure 
applies, or, alternatively, how urgent expenditure needs are to be met.
It may also be advisable to set up a special system for administration 
and accounting to cover disaster requirements. Such a system can 
be kept simple by using number-coded or color-coded forms.
• Special arrangements may be required for the urgent release or issue 

• 

of government goods and equipment.

• A special department or section may have to be set up to ﬁnalize 
administrative and ﬁnancial matters, as well as to assess the cost of 
the total counter-disaster effort. This may be particularly advisable 
if any attempt is to be made to calculate cost–beneﬁt with regard to 
future mitigation programs.

• Arrangements may be possible with international assistance agencies 

• 

to obtain assistance in offsetting disaster costs.
It may be possible to arrange for the employment of temporary or 
auxiliary personnel (e.g., former government employees) to assist 
in dealing with administrative overloads arising from disaster.

PART V

Major 
 Post-Impact 
Factors

Chapter 19

Recovery

Purpose

For the purpose of this handbook, the following deﬁnition is applied to 

1. 
recovery:

Recovery is the process by which communities and the nation 
assisted in returning to their proper level of functioning following 
a disaster.

The recovery process can be very protracted, possibly taking 5–10 years or 
even more. Recovery is usually taken as including other aspects such as 
restoration and reconstruction.

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the major factors which apply 

2. 
to recovery, with particular reference to the following:

• Key points from disaster analysis,
• Transfer of responsibility from response to recovery,
• Continuation of response activity,
• The basis of recovery action,
• Problem areas in recovery,
• Major requirements for effective recovery,
• Human factors in recovery,
• Resources relevant to recovery programs, and
• Projection of the recovery process.

Reference to Other Aspects of Recovery

Various references to recovery have been made in preceding chapters of 

3. 
this handbook. The main such references are given below.

• 

 Chapter 3 contains various references to the place of recovery in 
national disaster management policy.

276 Disaster Management

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Chapter 5 refers to the place of recovery in the disaster management 
cycle.
 Chapter 6 contains reference to the linking of disaster management 
activities, including recovery, with national development planning.
 Chapters 8 and 9 contain references to the use of international 
resources in recovery programs.
 Chapter 10 discusses the ramiﬁcations of political leadership on the 
recovery process.
 Chapter 11 outlines various organizational aspects which apply to 
recovery.
 Chapter 12 refers to the need to include mention of recovery policy 
in national disaster plans.
 Chapter 17 discusses the follow-on activity from response operations 
into the recovery process.

• Chapter 18 contains reference to the logistic aspects of recovery.

Key Points from Disaster Analysis

Analysis of disaster events has identiﬁed various patterns and timescales 
4. 
for recovery activity. It also identiﬁes the following key points for disaster 
managers:

• 

• 

• 

 In most sizable disasters, there is no quick ﬁnalization of response/ 
recovery action.
 The potentially long recovery period means that the vulnerability of 
a stricken country to future disasters is exacerbated.
 The ﬁnancial and material demands of recovery programs 
usually restrict resources which might otherwise be available for 
strengthening other management measures (e.g., mitigation and 
preparedness).

The cumulative effect of the above factors is often clearly seen in very 
disaster-prone countries. In such countries, the repeated impact of disaster 
means that recovery is never really complete and that preparedness remains 
restricted. Thus, the countries seldom reach a stage when they can cope 
satisfactorily with their disaster threats.

Transfer of Responsibility from Response to Recovery

5. 
In Chapter 17 on response, reference was made to some problems 
which affect the transition from response activities to recovery programs. It 
was indicated that there tends in fact to be a somewhat blurred period between 
such activities and programs.

Recovery 

277

6. 
An important factor in this transition process is the actual transfer of 
authority. The transfer is, in fact, one which perforce takes place between 
two dissimilar processes; one (response) depends on urgency and short-term 
expediency, while the other (recovery) has to be of a more general, considered, 
and long-term nature. To amplify this point, the following considerations are 
relevant:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Response action is usually dealing with urgent problems which will not 
wait; they will only get worse unless urgent solutions are applied.
 Response action often takes place under extraordinary powers (e.g., 
a state of emergency or a declared national disaster). It can therefore 
go beyond normal day-to-day limits of authority. Such freedom of 
action does not apply to recovery.
 Response action must sometimes be taken without consideration of 
longer-term repercussions (e.g., effects on recovery programs).
 Some response actions may have direct implications for recovery 
programs (e.g., large-scale evacuation movement, the need to accept 
outside assistance which upsets the balance of the local economy).
 Response action may have lowered the capability of key government 
departments (by using up ﬁnancial allotments, fuel allocations, 
etc., and by lowering vehicle serviceability). Thus, when these 
departments are called upon to participate in recovery programs, 
this necessarily downgrades overall recovery capability.
 Recovery action may also have to operate within a changed 
community attitude. Emergency response action is usually accepted 
and supported by stricken communities because, basically, it is 
relieving their immediate problem(s). However, when the urgency 
of such problems has passed, communities tend to be more 
questioning, and perhaps demanding, concerning action being taken 
on their behalf.

In sum, therefore, when responsibility is transferred from response to recovery 
agencies, the latter are not only working within a blurred period; they may 
also face carryover problems from response and, moreover, be forced to cope 
with such problems with restricted capability.

Continuation of Response Activity

A further factor in recovery is the need to deal satisfactorily with response 
7. 
activities which continue, or have to be projected, beyond the end of the 
emergency response period (e.g., continued welfare programs). From an overall 
recovery viewpoint, these continuation activities need to be expeditiously dealt 
with on two counts:

278 Disaster Management

• 

• 

 First, as programs in their own right, in the public and national 
interest;
 Second, as part of the total strands of relief action which need to be 
carried through from response operations into longer-term recovery 
programs. For instance, short-term emergency feeding programs 
may have to be extended into special school nutrition programs, 
and temporary shelter arrangements may have to be converted into 
special rehousing projects. (See also Chapter 17.)

The Basis for Recovery Action

8. 
Given that the two foregoing issues of responsibility transfer and 
continued response activity are recognized and suitably dealt with, the basis 
for recovery action rests primarily on the following four pillars:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Production of an adequate information base from which to deﬁne 
the various necessary aspects of the recovery process;
 Deﬁnition of an overall strategy for recovery, compatible with 
proposed and potential national development;
 Determination of individual recovery programs within the overall 
strategy;
 Implementation of individual programs within the overall strategy; 
and
 Implementation of individual programs and projects on a well-
managed and coordinated basis.

These aspects are ampliﬁed below.

Problem Areas in Recovery

To put recovery into its full perspective, it is necessary to outline some 

9. 
of the typical problems which can arise, namely:

• 

• 

• 

 Delays occur in the formulation of recovery programs because the 
deﬁnition and management of recovery programs have not been 
adequately considered in overall counter-disaster planning and 
organization.
 Damage and destruction may be so severe and extensive that it 
is difﬁcult, and takes considerable time, to assess and formulate 
recovery programs.
 Information is inadequate for the formulation of recovery programs. 
In some cases, this can necessitate resurveys in order to establish 
 post-disaster effects more accurately.

Recovery 

279

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

that 

 The additional load imposed on the government system by recovery 
programs may slow down the functioning and output of government 
the whole recovery process becomes 
departments, so 
unsatisfactory.
 Occurrence of another major disaster (not necessarily of the same 
kind or in the same area) may divert funds and resources from 
recovery programs.
 Problems relating to ministerial responsibilities may arise because 
recovery requirements overlap from one department to another.
 Restrictions on availability of ﬁnance (and/or uncertainty concerning 
international assistance funding) may hinder the formulation of 
recovery programs.
 Political problems can sometimes arise if certain areas/communities 
appear to not be receiving the same priority of attention as others in 
regard to recovery programs.
 Inadequate attention may be given by governments to public 
information programs and public relations generally, so that false 
impressions or perceptions arise concerning recovery measures.
 Some major and vital reconstruction programs may take a long 
time (e.g., reconstruction of bridges, roads, and rail systems). This 
may cause economic loss, further hardship, and other problems for 
 disaster-affected communities.
 Limitations may apply to the implementation of recovery programs; for 
instance, in materials, equipment, specialist and skilled personnel.
 The time process of some recovery programs cannot be hastened; 
for instance, those which apply to the natural recovery of, say, 
coconut palms or oil palms. This usually has economic implications.
 Some recovery programs may necessitate substantial reorientation 
in national activities. For instance, disaster may affect an export 
market commodity (such as agricultural produce). The vacant 
market may then be taken over by another country and may be lost 
to the disaster-affected country for the foreseeable future.

The above items do not necessarily reﬂect all the problems which might affect 
recovery programs. But they illustrate the kind of difﬁculties with which 
disaster management ofﬁcials may have to deal.

Major Requirements for Effective Recovery

10. With the above possible problem areas in mind, major requirements 
for effective recovery are outlined below. In most cases, it is likely that, before 
recovery action can be established, discussion with international assistance 
agencies will need to take place. If (as suggested at various places in this 

280 Disaster Management

handbook) routine national/international disaster management contacts are 
maintained, the international assistance aspects of recovery time may have 
to be given over to assistance meetings and negotiations. In any event, before 
recovery action can be ﬁrmly established, the stricken country needs to have 
a reasonably clear idea of what outside assistance it can expect.

11. Understanding the Recovery Process

Ministers, their advisors, and others concerned with the formulation 
and direction of recovery programs should fully understand reconstruction 
and long-term community rehabilitation. The recovery process is therefore 
complex and extensive; it can generate a multiplicity of problems, some of 
which will necessitate changes to original plans as recovery proceeds. Thus, 
senior decision makers should be prepared to take a ﬂexible attitude toward 
policy implementation to produce the best results. Also, it is important to 
bear in mind that recovery from disaster offers opportunities for national 
improvement (sometimes called the “disaster as a beneﬁt syndrome”).

12. Recovery and National Development

The need to implement disaster recovery programs often has direct 
implications for national development plans. Where possible, therefore, 
it is desirable to reconcile appropriate aspects of recovery with national 
development planning. This has particular relevance to major restoration and 
reconstruction projects.

13. The Recovery Information Base

As already indicated, a primary prerequisite for recovery action is the 
availability of adequate and relevant information. Major sources for such 
information are as follows.

• 

 Information from response operations 
This may include:
– 
– various forms of operational reports;
– 

information from damage surveys and needs assessments;

 departmental and other reports on completion of emergency 
phase; also, similar reports from NGOs;
information collected by emergency operations centers;
reports from international assistance agencies;

– 
– 

 
 
 
 
 
Recovery 

281

– media information; and
– various submissions by individuals.

It is important that this information is in a form which can be used for 
recovery purposes. This may necessitate special processing, editing, or 
other similar treatment.

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Post-disaster review
 If post-disaster review can be carried out reasonably soon after 
completion of the emergency phase, the information acquired can 
also be utilized for recovery program purposes. For instance, this 
information may indicate that certain land-use restrictions need to 
be applied in the future. These, in turn, could have repercussions 
on longer-term recovery projects.

Information from development programs
 As indicated in paragraph 12 above, recovery requirements may have 
a direct bearing on existing development plans (e.g., the development 
of major road systems). Information concerning such development 
must therefore be taken into account for recovery purposes.

Information from special teams
 If a special technical advisory team is used to monitor recovery 
needs from the immediate post-impact stage, the information it can 
provide is likely to be of major value and importance.

Information for program parameters
 Information which affects the size and shape of recovery programs 
also needs to be taken into account. For instance:
– project costs,
timescales,
– 
 in-country input capability, including ﬁnancial, material, and 
– 
human resources,
international assistance potential.

– 

• 

Information from previous disasters
 Documented 
from previous disasters, especially 
concerning recovery programs, can also be of considerable assistance.

information 

14. Overall Recovery Strategy

The determination of overall recovery strategy obviously needs to be 
made at the top government level. Exactly, how this is done must depend on 
individual circumstances. However, in this regard, the advantages for having a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
282 Disaster Management

small technical advisory team to monitor post-disaster requirements from impact 
onwards, can be substantial (see also Chapter 17 on response). The strategy, 
when ﬁnalized, needs to be broad in nature and to include, for example:

• major areas of recovery need,
• envisaged time frame for recovery action,
• 

 interlinking of recovery with national development (see paragraph 12 
above),

• broad assessment of resources available, and
• 

system for monitoring recovery from national government level.

15. Policy Direction of Recovery Programs

Following from the overall strategy, it is important to ensure that policy 
direction for recovery programs is clearly established and deﬁned. Several 
options for the direction of programs include:

• A special ministerial committee;
• 

 One minister, with a special temporary ofﬁce or section, acting on 
Cabinet direction;
 Cabinet itself, providing direction to individual ministers and their 
departments.

• 

Whatever system is used, the important need is that there should be no doubt 
where responsibility lies for the overall direction of recovery action.

16. Determination of Program Needs and Areas

Analysis and assessment of all relevant information will enable individual 
recovery programs and the areas they are required to cover to be identiﬁed. 
Such programs are likely to include:

• Government aspects

– National infrastructure (roads, ports, railways, etc.);
– Government administrative facilities;
– Education facilities;
– Health-care systems; and
– Resettlement of displaced persons and communities.

• Private sector

Industrial systems.

– 
– Commercial buildings, stores, shops, tourist facilities, etc.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recovery 

283

• Community

– Reestablishment of social services system.
– Long-term rehabilitation of communities and individuals.

17. Assessment of Resources

Most recovery programs, especially those concerned with major 
reconstruction, tend to be costly. Early in the recovery process, it is important 
to establish what ﬁnance is available to carry out these programs. Similarly, 
an assessment of resources (such as equipment, materials, skilled personnel) 
needs to be made. These aspects are particularly important in determining the 
size and shape of the total recovery program.

18. 

International Disaster Assistance

International disaster assistance is usually generous, especially in the 
case of severe disasters. As indicated in Chapter 17 on response, such assistance 
plays an important part in emergency relief programs. It is also invaluable in 
recovery programs, where it usually takes the following forms:

• direct ﬁnancial donations, grants, or credits;
• equipment and materials;
• 

 project implementation (e.g., an overseas country will undertake a 
school rebuilding program or restoration of a wharf);
 international welfare agencies or religious bodies will help their 
counterparts in the stricken country.

• 

19. Program Decisions and Priorities

As early as possible in the recovery process, ﬁrm decisions need to be 

taken on:

• 
• 

the types of programs to be implemented, and
the priorities which should apply.

These decisions must obviously be taken at the national government level, 
especially in view of their possible connection with national development 
planning. When these program decisions and priorities are being made, it 
may also be worth considering what emergency action should apply to them 
if disaster strikes again, before they are completed. This could be particularly 
relevant in disaster-prone countries.

 
 
284 Disaster Management

20. Program Management and Monitoring

Effective management and progress monitoring of recovery programs 
is essential, particularly if such programs are complex and numerous. This is 
where the special minister/ofﬁce system (see paragraph 15) has some advantages, 
because it concentrates action and detailed decision making into one place in 
government. Also, it provides an easily recognizable focal point for inquiries 
and information; this is especially desirable if the follow-on programs from 
response are extensive. However, in many cases, governments have chosen 
to follow the principle of returning to the normal systems and processes of 
government as soon as possible. This has usually been done on the basis that 
such systems and processes are well-established and understood; thus they are 
likely to be more effective than some specially introduced alternative. In these 
cases, programs have usually been directed from Cabinet, through individual 
ministerial responsibilities.

21. Continuation of Emergency Relief Programs

It is important that programs running over from the emergency phase 
(e.g., emergency feeding programs) should continue to receive the necessary 
priority. If not, they can easily become overshadowed by the larger recovery 
programs. Such follow-on programs therefore need to be monitored and 
assessed alongside recovery programs, since they are part of the total recovery 
process.

22. Disaster Management Aspects

Since recovery programs tend to be managed through normal government 
processes, participation in them by disaster management authorities may be 
fairly limited. However, disaster management aspects should not be overlooked, 
because major reconstruction projects, if not properly evaluated, may produce 
disaster-related problems in the future. To avoid such possibilities, there should 
be an ongoing system of liaison between national development planning and 
disaster management.

23. Public and Media Information

It is obviously desirable that the public and the media should be kept 
appropriately informed of various aspects of recovery programs. Special 
arrangements may therefore be necessary to provide brieﬁngs and other 
dissemination of information. The special minister/ofﬁce system for recovery 
program management is, of course, well suited for fulﬁlling this information 
requirement.

Recovery 

285

Human Factors in Recovery

24. A great deal of material has been published concerning the physiological, 
psychological, and sociological effects of disaster, and this is widely available 
to disaster managers who wish to study these aspects in detail. For the 
purpose of this chapter, however, the inclusion of certain practical references 
is considered appropriate, as below.

25. Disaster Victims’ Attitudes

An exceptionally experienced disaster relief ofﬁcial has noted, after no 
less than 44 years of direct involvement with disaster victims, that ﬁve post-
disaster characteristics become clearly discernible.1 These are summarized 
below.

(1) Devastation
 This stage manifests with general shock and a certain numbness or 
failure to comprehend the full implication of the situation. The victim is 
prone to burst into tears and repeat over and over again certain aspects 
of the damage which have indelibly imprinted themselves on his/her 
memory. Sometimes victims almost appear hard of hearing or mentally 
incapable of comprehending what one is saying.

(2) Realization
 The realization period appears to develop with particular emphasis 
when the person returns to the site of their now destroyed dwelling. 
They search amid the rubble for speciﬁc items, such as memorabilia, old 
rings and brooches, something that belonged to mother or grandfather, 
and so on. Gradually an overwhelming depression comes with the 
realization that all things, or at least most of them, that made up their 
background security have disappeared.

(3) Rationalization
 After a few days, the victim starts to assess his/her past, present, and future.

 First, the question that comes to a victim’s mind is “Why did this happen 
to me?” It has been surprising to learn from a number of persons that their 
minds run along similar tracks. Many people seem to develop the idea, 
particularly elderly people, that God is punishing them.

1 Dame Phyllis Frost, Chair, State Relief Committee, Victoria, Australia, in a report on a major bushﬁre

disaster in 1983.

 
 
 
 
286 Disaster Management

 The rationalization of the present takes most people in a constructive 
way and they start immediately cleaning up the area that has been left, 
making provision for the children’s schooling, incorporating the help 
of relatives and friends, and gratefully receiving any government or 
private aid that is forthcoming.

 The rationalization for the future consists of assessing what will be best 
for the family, now that the previous dwelling and security items have 
been lost.

(4) Accusation
 After the victims have sorted themselves out, they seek, through the 
mass media or in other ways such as public meetings, to accuse those 
people whom they consider have been responsible for their suffering. 
This has increased with the advent of television and increased new 
facilities through the mass media and is encouraged by those involved 
in preparing and presenting programs through the mass media.

(5) Accumulation
 When the victim has developed to the fourth stage, the ﬁfth phase starts 
creeping in; this is the development of greed and avarice to such an 
extent that many victims take the emphasis off what they really need 
to be settled back into their homes, and start thinking in terms of what 
they would really like or want, which is a great deal more than their 
needs. This is the most unsavory factor that I have found when dealing 
with victims.

 There will almost certainly be variations of these characteristics in 
different countries and circumstances. However, the ones quoted serve 
as a good example of the frame of mind of victims when they become 
involved in the recovery process.

26. Relocation of Communities

In a number of recovery circumstances, it has been found necessary 
to relocate communities or groups of people; for instance, in circumstances 
such as:

• 

• 

 complete loss of traditional subsistence land and dwellings because 
of major earthquake/landslide/riverbank erosion;
 repeated damage to or destruction of living areas by persistent 
ﬂooding.

 
 
Recovery 

287

In general, under such circumstances, relocation results in a number of 
problems, even though the new environments tend to be better and safer to 
live in. Most of these problems tend to arise from human factors (e.g., being 
torn away from traditional roots) rather than from material ones. Predicted 
rises in sea levels may cause major relocation problems for some countries in 
the future.

27. Evacuation

Human factors can also inﬂuence evacuation. While evacuation is 
usually a response measure, at least in the ﬁrst place, its effects often spill over 
into the disaster management aspects of recovery. This particularly applies 
if evacuees cannot be returned to their home areas reasonably quickly. In 
such cases, the evacuees themselves can become restless and worried by their 
enforced absence from their own land and property; also, the longer they stay 
in the evacuation zone, the greater becomes the possibility of friction with the 
local population.

28. Resettlement

Even if relocation, evacuation, and similar problems are conﬁned to a 
minimum, human factors are still likely to bear on the general resettlement of 
communities into a normal pattern of life. In the recovery period, people can 
often be affected for considerable periods by

family bereavement,
loss of property and possessions,

• personal injuries and trauma,
• 
• 
• damage to dwellings, and
• 

reduced means of livelihood.

These factors tend to generate problems which can affect an already 
overburdened recovery process. For instance, they can lead to reduced 
efﬁciency in people who are required to implement recovery programs, and 
increased load on social security and similar agencies.

288 Disaster Management

Resources Relevant to Recovery Programs

29. The resources most relevant to recovery programs can be summarized 
as follows:

 Resource organizations responsible for providing data for, and assessment of 
recovery programs

• disaster management authorities;
• government planning authorities;
• government departments, organizations, and agencies;
• 
• NGOs; and
• 

statistical, information, and media agencies.

international funding agencies;

 Resource organizations responsible for deciding on types and numbers of 
recovery programs and relevant priorities

• 

 national government, assisted as appropriate by regional and local 
governments and NGOs (plus supporting advice from international 
funding agencies).

 Resource organizations responsible for directing and monitoring recovery 
programs

• 

 minister and departments, and/or other authorities, as designated 
by national government.

 Resource organizations responsible for implementing recovery programs.

• government departments, organizations, and agencies;
• private sector contractors and other resources;
• 
• 
• program specialists.

international assistance teams;
international and national welfare organizations; and 

 Organizations capable of providing support for implementation of recovery 
programs

• NGOs;
• community groups, including religious bodies;
• other volunteers; and
• media and information agencies.

Recovery 

289

Projection of the Recovery Process

In the total process of recovery from disaster, nations hope to achieve 
30. 
maximum possible beneﬁt from possible beneﬁt, especially in terms of 
enhanced infrastructure, counter-disaster capability, and general development. 
Unfortunately recovery, particularly in its early stages, is usually a period in 
which government capability is still downgraded because of disaster impact. 
At the same time, political pressures may arise because the disaster-affected 
population becomes impatient at delays in the restoration of its former amenities 
and subsistence level. All this can and often does lead to a situation wherein the 
recovery process is implemented hurriedly and is not therefore projected deeply 
enough into the long-term future.

31. 
Therefore, in the formulation of recovery programs, it should be 
recognized that, in the disaster cycle, the four segments which follow recovery 
are development, prevention, mitigation, and preparedness, in that order. If 
these four segments or components are visualized as providing a total combined 
ﬁeld for post-disaster exploitation, then recovery takes on a very far-reaching 
potential. The following example illustrates this point.

 Restoration of a coastal road system following damage caused by storm surge/ 
severe wave action can:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 improve transport movement for business, tourism, social, and 
disaster response purposes;
 through the inclusion of seawall protection measures, help mitigate 
the effects of future disasters;
 through careful rerouting, place reconstructed en-route human 
settlements further inland, thus reducing future community risks;
 improve drainage so that the road system is less vulnerable to the 
effects of ﬂooding.

This multipurpose approach to recovery programs is worthy of attention from 
the viewpoints of government policy, national development, and disaster 
mitigation/management.

Chapter 20

Post-Disaster Review

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the major considerations which 

1. 
apply to post-disaster review.

2. 

The chapter covers:

the importance of post-disaster review,
some reasons for the omission of such review,

• 
• 
• aspects covered by review,
• major investigations into disaster, and
• use of results.

Other References to Post-Disaster Review

3. 

Other references in this handbook to post-disaster review are:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Chapter 3 refers to the use of post-disaster review as a means of 
helping check the validity of national disaster management policy.
 Chapter 5 indicates the place of post-disaster review in the disaster 
management cycle.
 Examples of disaster legislation contained in Chapter 7 include the 
need for an annual report on disaster-related activities. Such reports 
could constitute a form of review.
 Chapter 12 contains various references to the place of post-disaster 
review in plans.
 Chapter 14 emphasizes the importance of post-disaster review in 
the monitoring of preventive measures.
 Chapter 16 quotes post-disaster review as an element in assisting to 
maintain levels of preparedness.
 Chapter 19 refers to the importance of timely post-disaster review 
as a source of information for the formulation of recovery programs.

292 Disaster Management

The Importance of Post-Disaster Review

The aforementioned references indicate the importance of post-disaster 
4. 
review; and there is no doubt that the experience and lessons gained from a 
disaster event can be used to improve many aspects of disaster management 
for the future. However, as explained below, post-disaster review is sometimes 
overlooked or otherwise omitted. The importance of ensuring, as far as 
possible, that post-disaster review is carried out should therefore be stressed 
in national policy and plans. Also, if considered necessary, such review could 
be made mandatory under disaster legislation or regulations.

Reasons for Omission of Post-Disaster Review

In some cases, post-disaster review is overlooked or omitted from the 

5. 
disaster management process. Some reasons for this are given below.

• Pressure of the recovery process

 Sometimes recovery requirements are extensive and extremely urgent 
and they place heavy demands and pressures on virtually all available 
national resources; this can apply particularly in small countries. 
 Post-disaster review is therefore crowded out by the need to give 
priority to recovery programs.

• Government reluctance

 If a disaster has been badly handled by government, this may 
invoke widespread criticism from opposition politicians and the 
community. A government may therefore play for time by delaying 
 post-disaster review to a point when it is no longer useful or 
effective. Governments may also wish to avoid publicizing disaster 
management shortcomings in case these adversely affect future 
support from international assistance sources. These sensitivities 
may be understandable. However, they are counterproductive for 
effective disaster management and governments should recognize 
that a conﬁdential unpublished report, which tells the truth to all 
people who need to know, is better than no report at all.

• Administrative delay

 Similarly, but because administrative delays or shortcomings, post-
disaster review may be left until too late to be of use.

 
 
 
Post-Disaster Review 

293

Aspects Covered in Post-Disaster Review

Normally, post-disaster review needs to be as comprehensive as possible 

6. 
and to include the following aspects:

• 

 Status of plans, mitigation measures, and preparedness prior to the 
disaster;

• Communications;
• 

 Warning, including origin(s), transmission and receipt, processing 
dissemination, action taken (by government, the community, etc.), 
functioning of warning systems;
 Activation of the counter-disaster system and mobilization of 
resource organizations;
 Emergency operations centers, acquisition, receipt and handling of 
information, display and assessment of disaster situation, decision 
making, dissemination of decisions and information;
 Assignation of tasks to organizations involved in the disaster 
operation;
 Operations carried out, including search and rescue, casualty 
handling, initial relief measures, clearance of vital routes/areas, 
evacuation, restoration of services;

• 

• 

• 

• 

• Arrangements for emergency feeding, health, welfare, and shelter;
• 
• 

International assistance arrangements;
 Assessment of public awareness programs, in the light of community 
reactions;

• Training aspects;
• Provision of information for recovery programs;
• 

 Any special factors raised by the nature and effects of the particular 
disaster; and

• Research requirements revealed by the disaster.

7. 
If circumstances are appropriate, post-disaster review can include 
brieﬁng from specialists on future trends and developments. This can help 
achieve optimum use of post-disaster experience.

Major Investigations into Disasters

8. 
Following some disaster events, governments may consider it necessary 
to hold a major review or investigation. This can apply if liability or litigation 
is involved. Some relevant disaster management points are:

• 

 In major investigations, such as legal inquiries, it may take 
considerable time before the outcome is released. Thus, any relevant 

294 Disaster Management

• 

• 

disaster management guidelines may not be available in time for the 
next anticipated disaster (e.g., seasonal ﬂooding).
 For in-country reviews which are primarily concerned with matters 
such as mitigation, preparedness, and response, it may be advisable 
for the committee concerned to issue some form of interim advice 
letters to government. This enables major issues to be highlighted 
and dealt with ahead of the ﬁndings. This is important where 
disasters are seasonal, especially to implement mitigation and 
preparedness measures before the next high-risk period.
 Where possible and permissible under the terms of reference of 
committees of investigation, a disaster management ofﬁcial should 
be available in an advisory role.

Use of Results

The results of post-disaster review can be used in many ways. These 

9. 
may include:

• 

• 

 The amendment or revision of the national disaster plan, other plans 
or standard procedures. Post-disaster review can, in fact, provide a 
good opportunity to rewrite plans and/or procedures.
 Amendment to preparedness, mitigation, and similar measures and/ 
or the introduction of new measures.
• Changes to organizational structure.
• 

 Revision of or adjustment to major disaster management aspects, 
such as training and public awareness.
• Adjustments to national development plans.

PART VI

Disaster 
Management 
Support 
Requirements

Chapter 21

Training

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline the major considerations which 

1. 
apply to disaster management training.

2. 

The chapter covers:

individual country requirements,
the need for training,
training policy,
types of training and trainee categories,
implementation of training,

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• public education, and
• annex containing examples of in-country programs.

Previous References to Training

3. 

Previous references to training in this handbook are summarized below.

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

 Chapter 4, which covers major requirements for coping with 
disaster, contains information on training aspects.
 Chapter 5 refers to the use of the disaster management cycle within 
training programs.
 Chapter 9 contains references to international assistance in training.
 Chapter 11 refers to the organizational requirements necessary to 
facilitate training.
 Chapter 12 recommends the inclusion within plans of a section on 
training requirements and refers to the use of training activities as a 
means of maintaining the viability of plans.
 Chapter 16 refers to the importance of training as a component of 
preparedness.
 Chapter 20 recommends that post-disaster review should cover 
lessons to be learned with regard to training.

298 Disaster Management

Individual Country Requirements

The training requirements of individual countries are likely to vary. For 

4. 
instance, these requirements will be conditioned by:

the size and geographical disposition of the country,
the disaster threat,

• 
• 
• national policy toward disaster,
• 
• 
• 

the nature and availability of disaster-related resources,
the degree of dependence on international assistance, and
training capability.

Countries should, therefore, carefully examine their individual circumstances 
and clearly establish their training requirements; also how these requirements 
can be met.

The Need for Training

Disaster management, as it is currently developing, covers a wide range 

5. 
of functions and skills. These include:

• Planning;
• Organization;
• Day-to-day management activities;
• Counter-disaster operations;
• Crisis management activities;
• Logistic functions;
• Recovery management;
• 

• 

 Participation in major programs such as national development, 
prevention, and mitigation; and
 Specialist skills applicable to rescue, ﬁrst aid, assessment, emergency 
relief and welfare, communications, information management, and 
so on.

Not all the above functions and skills call for specialist full-scale training 
6. 
because a basis of competence often already exists. For example, it is generally 
acknowledged that governments carry the major responsibility for dealing with 
disaster and that government resources must be utilized to optimum effect. 
Such resources (that is, government departments and agencies) are already 
trained and proﬁcient in their basic roles. Thus, from a disaster management 
viewpoint, there is no need to train, say, the personnel of a public works 
department to clear debris from roads; they can do this as a normal procedure. 
Similarly, members of standard emergency services, such as police, ﬁre 

Training 

299

authorities, ambulance service, and others, are well trained in various crisis 
functions. They do not need additional training in their specialist roles. Again, 
government ofﬁcials are practiced in day-to-day management; they do not 
require training in more of the same.

7. 
Clearly, therefore, training needs must, ﬁrst of all, take into account this 
existing basis of competence. Only then can an accurate assessment of these 
needs be achieved. In principle, such an assessment will tend to indicate that 
certain areas of training need to be covered. These areas, which are outlined 
in paragraphs 10–11 below, obviously need to be compatible with training 
policy.

Training Policy

In the past, counter-disaster training has often been regarded as a 
8. 
complex and expensive undertaking, which many countries could not afford. In 
more recent years, however, it has become clear that by using overseas training 
assistance and making full use of in-country capabilities, most countries can 
achieve reasonable training standards. In any event, three important policy 
considerations are usually applicable to disaster management training. These 
are outlined in Chapter 4 and are restated here for ease of reference.

• 

• 

 First, countries should identify their own training needs. To take 
examples from other countries and academic sources and try to 
apply them as exact “blueprints” are unlikely to prove satisfactory.
 Second, training programs must be designed to be compatible with 
and give support to counter-disaster plans.

• Third, responsibility for training must be clearly deﬁned.

Chapter 4 contains a suggested outline for a simple training policy 

9. 
document. As an alternative, some countries prefer to state such policies in:

• A document outlining national disaster management policy, or
• A national disaster plan.

Types of Training and Trainee Categories

10. An assessment of training needs will indicate the broad types of training 
which need to be undertaken and the categories of people who need to be 
trained. These are likely to comprise:

• Disaster management training

Training for existing or potential managers (e.g., government 
ofﬁcials and senior persons in NGOs) to equip them for specialist 

300 Disaster Management

 disaster-related tasks, and to orient them to various aspects of crisis 
management.

• Skills training

Training for those persons who may be required to undergo duties in:

Emergency operations center,
Rescue,
First aid,
Emergency feeding and welfare,
Communications,

 Needs and damage assessment.

 Such persons may include members of government agencies, NGOs, 
and community volunteers. In some cases, they may need to be trained 
as auxiliaries to support existing emergency services (e.g., for auxiliary 
rescue teams acting in support of the police and ﬁre authorities).

• 

 Coordination training
 Training for coordinated disaster management action is likely to be 
required for all key persons in:

Standard emergency services,
Government departments and agencies,

 NGOs, and

Community/private sector groups.

 As an adjunct to this training, the services and the organizations 
themselves need periodic practice in coordinated action, usually in 
the form of combined exercises.

• Specialized training

Training, often by means of workshops or seminars, to cover:

specialized subjects such as mitigation measures,
special brieﬁngs (e.g., politicians), and
annual preparedness reviews.

11. While the four types of training requirements mentioned above are likely 
to comprise the core activities, other possibilities should not be overlooked. In 
practice, training requirements tend to ﬂuctuate considerably, the emphasis on 
some activities fades, while the need for other activities increases. Thus training 
programs need careful monitoring, with adjustment being applied as necessary 
It should also be borne in mind that, to meet local needs, training activities 
could comprise a mixture of the four above-quoted categories. For instance, a 
course dealing with response operations might include:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Training 

301

• Managers,
• Persons involved in the warning process,
• EOC action desk ofﬁcials,
• Persons responsible for needs and damage surveys,
• Public relations ofﬁcials.

See also the appendix to this chapter which covers some possible examples of 
in-country training programs.

Implementation of Training

12. General Considerations

Before establishing and implementing training programs, it is prudent 
to identify and consider certain in-country factors which affect training overall. 
These may include:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 The basis of organization which applies to disaster management, 
since this inﬂuences levels of training. It also provides a suitable 
training structure or framework.

 The current status of disaster management, because this bears on 
the required scope of training programs.

 The degree to which the disaster management system is utilized 
in some or all of its various functions (especially mitigation, 
preparedness, response, recovery). This will reﬂect existing, up-
to-date experience and thus help identify types of training which 
need to be given particular emphasis.

 The experience of disaster management staff, especially that of 
key ofﬁcials, which needs to be melded into and within training 
programs.

 The facilities which are available to implement training programs, 
particularly in terms of instructional staff, also accommodation, 
instructional aids, and administrative support (see also paragraph 16 
below).

13. The Aim(s) of Training Programs

After considering factors such as those mentioned above, it is important 
to deﬁne the aim of training program(s) and of the courses and other activities 

302 Disaster Management

within such programs. Clear deﬁnition of the aim helps signiﬁcantly in 
determining the size and shape of programs and the syllabi for individual 
courses and activities.

14. Responsibility for Training

In paragraph 8 above, it is advocated that responsibility for training must 
be clearly deﬁned within the overall training policy. In most countries, it is 
probably best to place this responsibility with the chair of the NDC or committee. 
Day-to-day training matters can then be delegated by the chair to the NDMO 
(or Section).

15. Duration of Training Programs

As stated earlier, training requirements tend to ﬂuctuate. It is therefore 
advisable to review the contents of training programs regularly. Depending on 
the size and nature of such programs, this might be done annually or biennially. 
If a training program is being introduced for the ﬁrst time, it is useful to run it 
over a pilot period of, say, 1–1.5 years, after which it should be evaluated as a 
guide for the future.

16. Training Staff and Facilities

The implementation of training programs is obviously inﬂuenced by 
the availability of suitable accommodation, institutional facilities/equipment, 
and staff. On this aspect, the following factors are usually worth considering.

• 

• 

• 

 The NDMO/section should be given the responsibility for overseeing 
 day-to-day training matters.

 Members of this ofﬁce/section should receive training at a suitable 
disaster management establishment (e.g., the Asian Disaster 
Preparedness Center in Bangkok). If such training could include 
instructional techniques, this is advantageous.

 The NDMO/section should be provided with a set of local training 
guidelines. If considered appropriate, this can be done as an 
attachment to the training policy document, or as an annex to the 
national disaster plan (the latter is a useful method since the plan 
should come under regular scrutiny either in a post-disaster or 
periodic review).

Training 

303

• 

• 

• 

 Local disaster-experienced ofﬁcials and the resources of government 
training sections should be used to assist in formulating and 
implementing training programs. Also, there is usually a good deal 
of instructional expertise within police, defense force, educational, 
Red Cross, religious, welfare and similar resources; and the use 
of this expertise is not only invaluable from a purely training 
viewpoint since it also helps signiﬁcantly in disaster management 
coordination. Astute use of these local personnel resources can go 
a long way to offsetting the often-perceived shortage of suitable 
trainers. For instance, in one country, the graduates of a series 
of disaster management courses for government ofﬁcials formed 
themselves into an association of trainers.

 The use of mobile training concepts can also be beneﬁcial. The 
roving seminar type of activity is not only economical in utilizing 
resources; it also has the additional asset of taking training direct to 
the users in their own area.

 Use can also be made of any systems which may be applicable 
to local circumstances. For instance, community radio listening 
groups exist in some remote areas; also, radio is widely used for 
disseminating government information programs (e.g., on child 
welfare). These radio links can similarly be used for passing training 
information down to the community level.

17. 

International Training Assistance

International assistance should never be regarded as a substitute for in-
country training but it can certainly provide valuable support for the latter. 
The following points are therefore worthy of consideration.

• 

• 

• 

 Agencies such as UNDRO, USAID, AIDAB, Red Cross, World 
Meteorological Organisation, World Health Organisation, and 
others have sponsored seminars and workshops on various aspects 
of disaster management.

 Certain church bodies and welfare organizations have signiﬁcantly 
assisted their in-country branches in promoting disaster-related 
capability.

 AODRO (the Australian Overseas Disaster Response Organisation) 
has specialized in assisting NGOs, primarily in the South Paciﬁc 
region. Assistance has been provided in the form of in-country 

304 Disaster Management

• 

• 

• 

workshops, aimed 
governments in accordance with national disaster plans.

largely at coordinating NGO support to 

 The Paciﬁc Islands Development Program has included training 
assistance in its general disaster management support for the Paciﬁc 
region.
 The Asian Disaster Preparedness Center of the Asian Institute of 
Technology, Bangkok, provides in-country support on various 
aspects requested by countries. In addition to general training, some 
speciﬁc technical subjects are disaster-resistant building techniques, 
earthquake engineering studies and cyclone warning systems.

 Countries such as the United States, Japan, United Kingdom, Australia, 
New Zealand, Canada, and the Netherlands have contributed in 
various ways to in-country training initiatives. This has sometimes 
been done within major international development programs.

18. Examples of In-Country Programs

Some examples of possible in-country programs are given in the Annex 

to this chapter.

Public Education

19. 
It is widely accepted that the broad objectives of training are to teach 
people to carry out speciﬁc tasks based on accepted methodology. Education, 
on the other hand, is more concerned with the development of mental capacity 
and thus with people’s attitudes.

20. 
From a disaster management viewpoint, therefore, there is beneﬁt in 
contributing to public education, as far as possible, in support of training 
programs. This contribution could also be seen as furthering public awareness, 
which is the subject of Chapter 22.

It is suggested, therefore, that national authorities concerned with 
21. 
disaster management training, and associated public awareness should take 
advantage of media and other opportunities to apprise the public of current 
and proposed disaster-related activities. Assistance in educating the public 
to understand the beneﬁts of long-term mitigation, especially in relation to 
national development and preservation of the environment, should be regarded 
as a valid and productive objective for disaster management. In this regard, 
programs of disaster education in schools can obviously play an important 
part, as has been well illustrated in a number of countries.

Training 

305

Annex to Chapter 21

EXAMPLES OF IN-COUNTRY TRAINING PROGRAMS

This Annex gives some examples of possible programs which might be 

1. 
adapted for use as part of in-country training schemes.

A useful way of monitoring in-country training requirements and 

2. 
progress is to do so against the following categories of activity.

• 

Individual Training
• Skills training (e.g., in categories such as rescue, ﬁrst aid)
Collective Training
• 

 Seminars and workshops (e.g., Annual Preparedness Seminar, Post-
Disaster Review Workshop)
 Training modules (e.g., on General Disaster Management Response 
Operations)
Collective Exercises
• Simulation exercises (indoor)
• Skeleton exercises (outdoor)
• Unit (single agency, full scale)
• Combined

3. 

 Example of a Seminar Activity: 
National Disaster Policy Seminar

Aim
 To review aspects of the national policy for dealing with disasters and 
to make recommendations as required.
Method
 Brieﬁngs, presentations, discussion, and formulation of recommendations.
Duration
1 day
Timing
As required but probably annually.
Content
 Selected aspects of mitigation; preparedness; plans; organization; 
response operations; training; public awareness; results of post-disaster 
review; other relevant aspects.
Attendance
 Senior government and nongovernment ofﬁcials holding, or likely to 
hold, senior positions of responsibility in disaster-related activities.

306 Disaster Management

4. 

 Example of a Workshop Activity: 
Disaster Response Workshop

Aim
 To consider factors which apply to disaster response operations and to 
make recommendations as required.
Method
 Brieﬁngs, presentations, discussion, and formulation of recommendations.
Duration
3 days.
Timing
As required.
Content
 Current plans and organization; warning; activation for response 
operations; communications; roles of EOCs; acquisition and processing 
of information including survey and assessment; emergency relief 
activities; coordination; public cooperation.
Attendance
 Members of government and NGOs or other persons who may have a 
responsibility in disaster response operations.

5. 

 Example of a Training Course Activity: 
Disaster Preparedness Training Course

Aim
 To study disaster preparedness and the implementation of preparedness 
measures.
Method
Presentations, discussions, and exercises.
Duration
A series of weekend or evening sessions.
Timing
As required.
Content
 Current plans and organization; responsibilities for preparedness at the 
national, provincial, and local government levels; types of preparedness 
measures; warning arrangements; action on receipt of warning; public 
awareness and cooperation; any other preparedness and readiness factors.
Attendance
Members of government and NGOs or other persons who may have 
responsibilities relating to disaster preparedness.

Chapter 22

Public Awareness

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to outline major factors which apply to 

1. 
public awareness.

2. 

The chapter covers:

the importance of public awareness,
responsibility for public awareness programs,

• 
• 
• main aspects of programs,
information format,
• 
• 
information channels,
• organization of programs,
• effectiveness of information, and
• maintenance of awareness levels.

Previous References to Public Awareness

Previous references to public awareness in this handbook are summarized 

3. 
below.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Chapter 2, which deals with the disaster threat, repeatedly includes 
public awareness and education among general countermeasures.
 Chapter 3, on national disaster management policy, refers to the need 
for community involvement and awareness to develop preparedness 
and self-reliance.
 In Chapter 4, on major requirements for coping with disaster, the 
need for community involvement and participation is emphasized.
 Chapter 5 advocates use of the disaster management cycle in programs 
of public education and awareness.
 Chapter 8, which deals with counter-disaster resources, includes the 
need to cover public awareness.
 In Chapter 10, on leadership, the aware, alert, and informed community 
is cited as an enormously strong asset for coping with disaster.

308 Disaster Management

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

involvement and participation 

 Chapter 11, dealing with organization, emphasizes the need to 
cover the development of public awareness and thus constructive 
in preparedness, 
community 
response, and recovery.
 Chapter 12 advocates the inclusion of a section within plans to 
cover public awareness.
 Chapter 14 quotes the need for programs of public awareness 
and education to keep communities apprised of risks and 
vulnerabilities, so that they will understand the need for preventive 
 countermeasures.
 In Chapter 16, emphasis is placed on public awareness and 
education as a measure of preparedness.
 Chapter 17 stresses the need for public information during response 
operations.
 Chapter 19 emphasizes the importance of public information 
during recovery programs.
 Chapter 20 advocates the need to cover public awareness programs 
during post-disaster review.
 Chapter 21 suggests that public education should be broadly linked 
to training programs.

The Importance of Public Awareness

4. Wide international experience illustrates and emphasizes the importance 
of public awareness in coping with crisis situations. Indeed, the references 
quoted above underline the strong connection between public awareness and 
virtually every other aspect of disaster management.

5. 

The Aim of Public Awareness Programs

The aim of public awareness programs is to promote an informed, 
alert, and self-reliant community, capable of playing its full part in support 
of and in cooperation with government, in all relevant disaster management 
matters.

6. 

Important Community Needs

In line with the above aim, most countries recognize that community 
members need to know the following facts in relation to possible disaster impact.

• What disaster will do;
• 

 The best immediate action to take, personally and by families and 
other kin groups;

Public Awareness 

309

• How best to help other members of the community;
• What the government has planned to do to help the community;
• 

 How to participate effectively in the disaster communication and 
warning process; and
 How to improvise shelter and sustenance until assistance is 
available.

• 

7. Government/Community Understanding and Cooperation

In conjunction with the foregoing community crisis needs, there are 
several factors affect good understanding and cooperation between government 
and communities. These usually include the following:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 In addition to knowing what government has planned to do to help 
it in time of disaster, the community should also have at least a 
broad understanding of the scope and limitations of government 
responsibility. This applies to all disaster-related matters, including 
prevention, mitigation, and national development.
 The government and the community must act together to overcome 
the crises which arise from disaster and to ensure a rapid return to 
normal conditions.
 The community needs to understand and be able to implement 
certain measures of self-preparedness when required to do so.
 Similarly, it is important for the community to understand the 
government’s problems in providing post-impact relief, especially 
the difﬁculties in accurately establishing immediate needs.
 It is usually in the community’s own interests to cooperate, to 
the maximum extent possible, with the government in disaster 
management programs.
 For its part, the government needs to understand and take into 
account the fact that, under disaster conditions, the public is 
usually affected by shock, loss, and other trauma, and needs treating 
accordingly.

Responsibility for Public Awareness Programs

8. 
As with training, responsibility for public awareness programs needs to 
be clearly deﬁned. It is probably best in most cases to place responsibility with 
the authorities which also cover training. In other words, overall responsibility 
should rest with the chair of the NDC or Committee, with day-to-day matters 
being delegated to the NDMO (or Section).

310 Disaster Management

Main Aspects of Programs

Normally, the following main aspects of public awareness programs 

9. 
need to be clearly established:

• The information which needs to be communicated to the public,
• The format in which the information is to be communicated, and
• 

 The medium (or channel) which is to be used to convey the 
information to the public.

In establishing these main program aspects, it is beneﬁcial to consider 
10. 
to what extent government/community factors, such as those mentioned in 
paragraph 7 above, can and should be reﬂected in the programs themselves. 
Other factors which need to be taken into account are:

• Community experience of disaster, and
• 

 Expectancy and dependency factors, which may have 
led 
communities to become overdependent on government assistance, 
thus eroding community and individual self-reliance.

11. Program Themes

If considered appropriate, various themes can be used in implementing 
public awareness programs. These, which can be changed and/or given 
particular emphasis from time to time, might include the following:

• 

• 

• 

 Disasters are not discriminative. Certainly they affect individuals, 
families, and communities. However, they also affect the national 
infrastructure, the national economy, and the efforts of government 
in improving national development and the living standards of the 
people.
 The community and the government are interdependent in coping 
with disaster. They must work together to overcome the problems 
which arise and to restore things to normal.
 The community is better equipped to cope with disaster if it is able 
to undertake certain basic measures for preparedness, self-reliance, 
and self-help; and if it accurately understands the aims, scope, and 
limitations of government assistance programs.

12. 

Information to be Communicated to the Public

The information to be communicated to the public can be divided into 

various categories, for example:

Public Awareness 

311

Basic Community Needs
These can be along the lines of those stated in paragraph 6 above.

Information on Government Assistance Programs
This might include:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 Community-relevant details of the national disaster management 
system,
 Any necessary information to amplify the foregoing basic community 
needs. This might include special warning signals, designated 
shelters of safe havens, evacuation procedures, and so on.
 The limitations imposed on government assistance by factors such 
as the need for survey and the time this takes, logistic problems in 
providing relief supplies, and the necessity to establish priorities for 
various relief measures.
 Any other information applicable to particular circumstances.

Seasonal Preparedness Reminders
 When probable disasters are seasonal (e.g., ﬂoods, tropical cyclones), 
the preseason period provides a receptive time for emphasizing public 
awareness factors especially, say, preparedness cleanup, warnings, 
possibility of evacuation, etc.

 Post-Impact Information
 Communication with the public immediately following disaster impact 
is a very important part of disaster response. It should therefore be a 
part of public awareness programs to explain:

• The general response intentions of government;
• The kind of information likely to be passed to the community;
• 

 How it is intended to pass this information (i.e., by broadcast or 
other means); and
 Community responsibility for taking action on receipt of this 
information, when required.

• 

Information Format

13. The format for communicating information to the public (as distinct 
from the channels used) can vary. Some possible options are:

• Notices;
• Posters;

312 Disaster Management

• Cartoons;
• Photographs;
• Films, ﬁlm clips, videos;
• 
• Short radio or television features; and
• Talks or presentations.

Inserts into ongoing programs on other subjects;

Information Channels

The following are examples of channels which have been used in various 

14. 
countries to communicate information:

• Telephone directories;
• Shopping bags;
• 

 Existing government programs (on, say, health education), which 
can be used to carry short inserts concerning preparedness and 
other disaster-related matters;

• Radio and television;
• 

 Cinema programs (for instance, a short ﬁlm of a previous disaster is 
a very good reminder, especially in a preseason period).
 Special information displays (especially during a National Disaster 
Preparedness Day, or similar occasion);

• 

 Use of popular sporting events, etc. to display posters or banners.

• Police information channels;
• 
• Community gatherings/meetings of various kinds;
• Print media;
• Church, mission, and similar sources;
• 

 Voluntary organizations, especially if they are coordinated under 
some form of disaster support system; and

• School programs.

Organization of Programs

15. 
In organizing public awareness programs it is usually advisable to seek 
advice from information specialists (e.g., the government information service). 
As a guide, the initial organization of a program might concentrate on:

• 

• 

 A series of radio broadcasts (assistance with these can usually be 
provided by the national broadcasting authority, which has relevant 
experience in this ﬁeld);
 Publicity in the print media (the cartoon strip method has proved 
effective in a number of cases);

Public Awareness 

313

• 

• 

 Use of government-sponsored community schemes (as “carriers” 
for disaster-related information); and
 School programs, which offer good long-term dividends, especially 
in developing an informed, alert, and self-reliant community.

Effectiveness of Information

16. 
It is important to check, where possible, the effectiveness of public 
awareness programs. This particularly applies to the ability of programs to 
gain and maintain the interest of the people who are being targeted. It is 
also advisable to check periodically that the information being imparted by 
programs is being received by the public in its intended sense.

Maintenance of Awareness Levels

17. The maintenance of adequate awareness levels needs to be continuously 
monitored. Otherwise, programs will likely become stale and public interest 
will fade.

18. 
In Chapter 12 on plans, a deﬁnite program, or series of programs, 
is recommended to be established to help in maintaining the viability of 
plans. Public awareness activities are also suggested to be linked into such 
a program. This kind of approach probably provides the most effective basis 
for maintaining awareness levels. However, it is also suggested that a watch 
be maintained for any innovative ideas which may help to renew or freshen 
up awareness interest. Some of these ideas, while basically simple, can be very 
effective. For instance, manufacturers and distributors of everyday household 
goods can often be persuaded (in their own as well as the community interest) 
to use some promotional gimmick which will have strong public appeal. 
Overall, however, watchfulness by the responsible disaster management 
authority is the best insurance for maintaining public interest.

Chapter 23

Research

Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a short reference to aspects of 

1. 
research which are of particular relevance to practical disaster management.

2. 

The chapter covers:

• The extent of modern disaster-related research.
• The importance of research.
• Practical use of research information.

The Extent of Modern Disaster-Related Research

3. 
If one considers the scope of all disaster-related activities, it is clear that 
this handbook represents only a fraction of the total ﬁeld. Yet the foregoing 
chapters of the handbook cover many differing aspects—from hazards to 
organization, from planning to leadership, from mitigation to human behavior. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that disaster-related research can extend across 
a literally enormous area.

Indeed, if one looks at the contents list of this book, ﬁelds of matching 

4. 
research are readily apparent. Some existing examples are:

Meteorology and Climatology
 Climatic change, various aspects

Flood forecasting

Earthquake

Seismicity and earthquake risk

Volcanic Eruption
 Volcanic hazards, various aspects
Cyclone
 Wind tunnel tests

Fatigue loading on houses

 
 
 
316 Disaster Management

Drought

Rainfall patterns

 Desertiﬁcation
Chemical Hazard
 Air pollution
 Chemical hazard
Organization and Management
 Organization response
Behavioral aspects
Flood hazard management

Planning

Land-use planning

 Hazard mapping
Mitigation

Flood mitigation strategies
Shelters
Public Awareness

Public participation in counter-disaster activities

5. 
In addition to what might be called speciﬁc disaster research, such as 
the areas quoted above, it is important not to overlook lesser, but nonetheless 
valuable contributions. These might include investigation into:

• 

• 

• 

 Specialized aspects of transport safety (e.g., air trafﬁc control 
facilities which may help guard against a major aircraft accident);
 The application of legislation to aspects which can contribute to 
disaster mitigation;
 Investigation into and development of arrangements, such as 
insurance incentives, which help governments, businesses, and 
individuals reduce effects and losses.

6. While the extent of current research is encouraging, instances are 
repeatedly quoted of research efforts being constrained by limitations of funding, 
low priority being given to disaster-related research projects, and disaster-
related research having to be “back-carried” by larger research projects.

These constraints underline the importance of the relatively few centers 
which undertake specialized disaster research and those disaster management 
institutions which have a research responsibility within their charters.

7. 
An additional factor is the current limitation which applies to post-
disaster review and the evaluation of relief (and other) programs. Post-disaster 
review is covered in Chapter 20. However, with regard to the evaluation of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research 

317

disaster-aid programs, Cuny (in Disasters and Development) notes that there 
is a marked reluctance by the agencies concerned to do this. He maintains that 
there are a number of reasons for this, including the fact that if an evaluation 
is negative, and this information is made public, future agency funding may 
be affected. As Cuny notes, failure to evaluate programs means that mistakes 
are repeated again and again; thus the basis of information from which 
improvements might ﬂow remains undeveloped.

From a disaster management viewpoint, therefore, the overall situation 

8. 
concerning research might be summarized as follows:

• 

• 

• 

 There is a wide range of research into disaster-related subjects 
but projects are often constrained by restrictions on priorities and 
funding.
 Specialized disaster research is undertaken by only a very limited 
number of institutions.
 Post-disaster review and program evaluation make some contribution 
to research efforts, through the process of lessons learned, but this 
contribution needs to be strengthened (e.g., by identifying topics 
which require research).

The Importance of Research

The importance of research in relation to disaster management is that it 

9. 
should:

• Help eliminate the repetition of previous mistakes,
• 

 Contribute to improvements in ongoing disaster management 
capability,

• Assist in reducing vulnerability to disasters, and
• Stimulate forward-looking concepts for the future.

Toward these ends, the results of research must be usable and used. If they 
are not usable, the major onus is on the researcher. If they are usable but not 
used, then the disaster manager is at fault. There will obviously be peripheral 
exceptions to these two assertions but, fundamentally, they lie at the heart of 
the relationship between the researcher and the disaster manager. There is, of 
course, the added factor (and it is a critical one) that there must be coherent 
dialogue between the two. To establish this effective dialogue is something to 
which both the researcher and the disaster manager might give greater attention 
in the future. For certainly in the past, it has all too often been evident that the 
gap between the two was counterproductive for all concerned.

318 Disaster Management

10. However, it needs to be emphasized that the information ﬂow is very 
much a two-way affair. The disaster manager needs the researcher’s information 
if he/she is to improve things for the future. At the same time, the researcher 
needs feedback from the disaster manager to ascertain whether his/ her research 
information has worked; what effect developing disaster management practice 
is likely to have on upcoming research needs; and what kind of information, 
therefore, is required by the disaster manager in the future.

Practical Use of Research Information

In view of the foregoing factors, it is suggested that disaster managers 
11. 
should take a planned approach toward use of research information, rather 
than wait for occasional user opportunities to occur. Major factors in such an 
approach are likely to be:

• Disaster experience

 This, especially if it includes post-disaster review, should indicate 
broad disaster management areas in which adjustments and 
improvements are necessary. Such adjustments and improvements, 
if they are to be viable, need to be based on the best research and 
other information.

• Disaster management review aspects

 In addition to actual disaster experience, other aspects of disaster 
management act as a form of review. These include national 
reports (e.g., annual report to government by a National Disaster 
Council), training programs (particularly exercises and tests), and 
periodic checks of plans and operating procedures. The results of 
such reviews need to be applied in the light of current research 
knowledge and information.

• Projections of major national programs

 National 5-year plans (or similar major planning initiatives) require 
the best available existing data and forecast projections. Many 
countries now use some form of integrated approach to policies 
covering national development, environment protection, and 
disaster management. Up-to-date disaster research information can 
obviously make a valuable contribution to the development of these 
national programs.

• Major developments within national disaster management

 Initiatives which prompt developments within national disaster 
management may arise from various sources (e.g., disaster events, 

 
 
 
 
Research 

319

government decisions, public pressure, standard reviews). 
Sometimes these initiatives may constitute major changes from past 
policy; for instance, a country which has previously concentrated 
mainly on preparedness, response, and recovery may deem it 
necessary to embark on a major program of mitigation. Such a 
program may involve large sums of national and international 
assistance money and may depend critically on specialist, technical, 
and other information. In such cases, there is an obvious need 
to obtain the best possible up-to-date information as a program 
base. This need may have to be met by some form of speciﬁc 
research input; for example, a specialized review of the proposed 
program against a comprehensive background of available research 
information.

• Effects of specialist research efforts

 Sometimes a breakthrough in specialist research effort may have 
a signiﬁcant effect on disaster management arrangements. For 
instance, advances in communications systems may be so important 
in terms of warning capability and public reaction that they may 
have to be given near-immediate priority over other systems or 
facilities.

• Monitoring of available information

 Available research information obviously needs to be monitored by 
disaster management authorities to ensure that relevant data can be 
assessed and, where appropriate, used. Disaster managers therefore 
need to access various available mailing lists, such as the Natural 
Hazards Observer (published by the Natural Hazards Research and 
Application Information Center, University of Colorado, USA) and 
other publications. In this regard, it is of note that during 1990, 
the Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center 
advertised a Quick Response Program to enable disaster specialists 
to conduct short-term ﬁeld investigations immediately after impact 
(thus avoiding loss of valuable initial data). This monitoring role 
should be written into the duties statements of appropriate ofﬁcials/
organizations (e.g., a national disaster management ofﬁce).

 
 
320 Disaster Management

• 

Indirect sources of research information
 International conferences of various kinds often provide valuable 
access to research information and its use. Attendance at such 
conferences by disaster management ofﬁcials should therefore be 
encouraged, especially because it may throw valuable light on the 
success or otherwise of efforts to use research.

12. The foregoing examples represent only some of the approaches which 
might be made toward use of research information. Obviously, therefore, 
disaster management authorities need to develop their own system.

 
Appendixes

Appendix A

Vulnerability Analysis

Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to outline the major factors which 

1. 
apply to vulnerability analysis.

2. 

The contents of the appendix are particularly relevant to:
• Chapter 2 which deals with the disaster threat, and
• Chapter 15 which covers mitigation.

Acknowledgments

3. 
The entire contents of this appendix have been taken from the Technical 
Background Paper of Disaster Mitigation in Asia and the Paciﬁc (1990), prepared 
by the Asian Disaster Preparedness Center of the Asian Institute of Technology, 
for the Asian Development Bank. The authors of this paper are Dr. Ian Davis 
and Professor Dr. S. P Gupta. This contribution to the handbook is gratefully 
acknowledged.

Contents of the Appendix

4. 

The appendix includes the following main aspects:

• Risk,
• Hazard assessment,
• Vulnerability analysis,
• Physical vulnerability,
• Social vulnerability,
• Economic vulnerability,
• Resource requirement,
• Decision making, and
• Deﬁning an acceptable level of risk.

324 Disaster Management

Risk

Risk is deﬁned as the probability of meeting danger or suffering harm 
5. 
or loss. In relation to disaster, risk has been more speciﬁcally described as the 
probability that a disaster will occur, using relative terms such as high risk, 
average risk, and low-risk to indicate the degree of probability. Risk assessment 
includes an evaluation of all the elements that are relevant to an understanding 
of existing hazards and their effect on a speciﬁc environment.

6. 
Knowledge of hazards is provided by the various physical sciences such 
as meteorology, hydrology, geomorphology, seismology, and volcanology. The 
understanding of vulnerability includes physical, social, and economic aspects. 
To turn risk assessment into a useful planning tool, accurate information must 
be gathered from numerous and diverse sources, ranging from remote sensing 
of crop yields to the monitoring of volcanic activity, to the historical records of 
ﬂoods or earthquakes, and social surveys of livelihoods, living patterns, and a 
community’s perception of risk.

From these data, a fairly complete picture may be assembled of the 
7. 
prevailing risk expressed in terms of probabilities. There are several steps in risk 
assessment based on the related processes of hazard mapping and vulnerability 
analysis. They establish the nature, location, and scale of risks to society and 
its assets. This information can assist decision makers in deciding what can 
and should be protected and up to what level of safety, measured against the 
potentially disastrous effects of not initiating risk-reduction measures.

Hazard Assessment

8. 
Disasters result from vulnerable conditions being exposed to a potential 
hazard. Therefore, the ﬁrst step in taking any mitigation measures is to assess 
the hazard. Hazard assessment aims to come to grips with:

• the nature, severity, and frequency of the hazard;
• the area likely to be affected; and
• the time and duration of impact.

Hazard assessment concerns the properties of the hazard itself (i.e., cyclone, 
ﬂood, drought, earthquake, volcanic eruption, etc.) and its direct effect, not 
its effect on the socioeconomic environment which is covered by vulnerability 
analysis.

9. 
Hazard assessment begins with data collection; existing assessments 
and hazard maps; scientiﬁc data (meteorological, hydrological, seismological, 

Appendix A 

325

volcanological, etc.); other maps (topographical, geological, etc.); local lore 
and historical records; and socioeconomic or agricultural surveys. The data are 
then analyzed. One effective way of presenting hazard assessment is through 
hazard mapping. Hazard maps can be of macro or micro scale; for cyclones 
(cyclone track maps, wind velocity zoning maps, and cyclone/storm surge 
hazard maps); for ﬂoods (inundation maps); for earthquake and tsunami 
(epicentral maps, seismic zoning maps, seismic zone source maps, tsunami 
hazard maps); and for landslides (landslide hazard maps).

10. Next, data and maps are analyzed to arrive at the hazard assessment. 
The level of sophistication of hazard assessment will depend on the perception 
of risk and available resources. Formats for expressing the intensity (power or 
impact) of a particular hazard are well established. Tropical cyclones can be 
measured in terms of wind speeds; ﬂoods in terms of return periods, duration, 
and inundation levels relative to normal river or sea levels; earthquakes in 
terms of intensity indicating their effects on man-made structures or in terms 
of magnitude on the Richter scale.

Finally, an attempt should be made to express the probability of the 
11. 
event occurring over time. Probabilities are assessed on the basis of scientiﬁc 
data and historical records. Sophisticated new tools are available to assist in 
hazard mapping and assessment. For instance, aerial photography and satellite 
imagery can provide information about the landscape, ﬂooding, ﬁssures, 
fault lines, etc. Microcomputers have a growing potential for applications in 
developing countries as they become more powerful and relatively inexpensive. 
They can be used to store and present geographical data employing Geographic 
Information System (GIS) techniques in preparing hazard maps and for 
hazard modelling. In the simplest possible terms, hazard assessment attempts 
to specify that there is a certain probability of an event of a given proportion 
occurring in a certain area. It cannot predict with certainty when this event 
will happen or what its effects may be.

Vulnerability Analysis

12. Having established the space/time/intensity dimensions of hazard 
incidence as well as its general characteristics, the second step is vulnerability 
analysis. This is the process used to identify vulnerable conditions which are 
exposed to natural hazards. If an area is exposed to multiple hazards, vulnerability 
analysis should be carried out for each type of hazard. Like hazards themselves, 
vulnerabilities can be conveniently depicted on maps, either as a single 
vulnerability map for each type of hazard or as a multi-hazard vulnerability 
overlay. In general, vulnerability analysis provides information on:

326 Disaster Management

• 

• 

 the sectors at risk: physical (buildings, infrastructure, critical 
facilities, agriculture); social (vulnerable groups, livelihoods, 
perception of risk, local institutions, poverty); economic (direct 
losses, indirect losses); and
 the type of risk (damage to public infrastructure, production 
facilities, housing, or casualties).

Vulnerability analysis results in an understanding of the level of exposure of 
persons and property to the various natural hazards identiﬁed.

Physical Vulnerability

Physical vulnerability relates to buildings, 

13. 
infrastructure, and 
agriculture. The major focus of this appendix is on physical assets but the loss 
potential of crops, trees, livestock, and ﬁsheries should be recognized as well.

The vulnerability of buildings is affected by their site, design, shape, materials 
used, construction techniques, maintenance, and proximity of buildings to 
others. The weighing attached to each factor will vary according to the type 
of hazard encountered. Different hazards produce different forces affecting 
these structures.

The vulnerability of infrastructure is also speciﬁc, depending on the type of 
hazard. Infrastructure may be considered in three broad groups; transport 
systems (roads, railways, bridges, airports, port facilities); utilities (water, 
sewerage, and electricity); and telecommunications. Hazard protection 
measures such as ﬂood embankments are also considered part of the 
infrastructure once they have been installed.

Vulnerability analysis is especially concerned with the risk faced by critical 
facilities (sometimes termed “lifeline”) which are vital to the functioning 
of societies in disaster situations. Such facilities include hospitals and 
dispensaries; emergency services; key transport and communications systems; 
essential services and utilities; high occupancy buildings; and structures such 
as dams that are essential to the economy. Special consideration is given also to 
assessing the vulnerability of buildings of great cultural importance.

Social Vulnerability

14. While the physical elements listed above have received primary 
attention in past vulnerability studies, social vulnerability has been somewhat 
neglected. A general methodology to measure social vulnerability is still being 
developed, focusing on special categories of vulnerable groups; livelihoods 

Appendix A 

327

at risk; perception of risk; existence of local institutions; and level of poverty. 
Records of past disasters suggest that the following groups of people are 
particularly at risk and require special attention:

single parent families;

• 
• women, particularly when pregnant or lactating;
• mentally and physically handicapped people;
• children; and
the elderly.
• 

People living or working in remote areas and seasonal migrant labor 
groups may also be at risk and pose special problems for both relief and 
mitigation. If people are aware of potential hazards, their nature, and their 
likely impact, and understand what actions need to be taken to reduce risks, 
then they become less vulnerable. Risk perceptions need to be assessed 
and awareness programs need to be initiated. There are likely to be three 
determining factors. First, poverty levels are important because the poorer 
people are, the more they are exposed to everyday risks and the less concerned 
they are with infrequent hazards. Second, risk perception relates directly to 
the level of public awareness programs. Finally, the frequency of repeated 
hazards determines the perception of risk. In sum, if there are groups whose 
livelihoods are at risk, living or working in densely populated areas, with low 
perceptions of risk, and without institutional support, the cumulative effect 
would be high social vulnerability.

Economic Vulnerability

15. 
Economic vulnerability measures the risk of hazards causing losses 
to economic assets and processes. It focuses on evaluating the direct loss 
potential (i.e., damage or destruction of physical and social infrastructure and 
its repair or replacement cost, as well as crop damage and losses to the means 
of production); indirect loss potential (i.e., the impact on lost production, 
employment, vital services, and income-earning activities); and secondary 
effects (epidemics, inﬂation, income disparities, and isolation of outlying 
areas).1 With the insights provided by economic vulnerability analysis, it is 
possible to estimate direct and indirect losses and to design ways and means 
to mitigate them in relation to the estimated costs of relief/recovery actions 
and mitigation measures required. The estimation of potential losses can be 
carried out using various disaster scenarios based on mild, average, or worst 
case assessment to allow the authorities to gauge the scale of the problem. 

1 UNDRO. 1979. Disaster Prevention and Mitigation. A Compendium of Current Knowledge. Vol. 7 “Economic

Aspects,” p. 3, UN.

328 Disaster Management

It is, however, a hypothetical exercise and therefore unavoidably imprecise. 
With computer-modeling techniques, greater levels of accuracy will likely 
be attained in the future. However, disaster modelling is currently still in its 
early development stage. While computer modeling techniques for damage 
prediction have been extensively used in industrialized countries, they are only 
now being linked to the social/medical sphere to produce casualty predictions, 
which can then be incorporated into health disaster contingency planning.

In all phases of loss assessment, the primary source of data will be information 
on damage and casualties suffered in earlier disasters. This highlights a need 
for maintaining precise records. From these data, reasonable predictions of the 
likelihood of future losses in a similar disaster environment can be made. The 
projections need to be linked to the studies of physical and social vulnerability. 
The data from this exercise have two kinds of user: the emergency planning 
staff who can use them to reﬁne their planning, and the staff involved in 
general risk reduction activities who need the data to justify the expenses of 
mitigation programs aimed at reducing the incidence of future damage.

Information from hazard maps and physical vulnerability analysis may be used 
in economic vulnerability analysis. The aim is to ascertain what is likely to be 
destroyed or damaged. The resulting damage estimates can be crude general 
statements or more precise calculations. For example, in the case of buildings, 
the estimates could be given in three categories: slightly damaged but repairable 
at a cost not exceeding 20% of building value; severely damaged, but repairable 
at a cost 20–60% of building value; and destroyed or irreparably damaged if 
repair costs would exceed 60% of value. A key problem of damage estimation 
is the difﬁculty of distinguishing between normal deﬁciencies or weaknesses 
(i.e., existing pre-disaster damage resulting from poor maintenance) and 
damage induced by the disaster event. In practice, it is almost impossible to 
separate the two conditions.

In the case of commerce and industry, direct economic losses relate to 
buildings, plants, and stocks of raw materials and products. Indirect losses are 
more difﬁcult to assess. For example, the full economic losses resulting from 
communications disrupted by a damaged railway track or a collapsed bridge 
are difﬁcult to quantify. Industrial production ﬁgures for a given factory or 
agriculture region for earlier years may help identify the sudden interruption in 
the ﬂow of goods which could result from a disaster event. Indirect economic 
losses may also arise over the longer term if markets are lost permanently 
because of interrupted production.

If a country receives a grant from external sources for rehabilitation or 
reconstruction, part of the economic losses may be offset. However, UNDRO 

Appendix A 

329

estimates that the international aid received after a disaster seldom exceeds 
4% of total losses.12 Inevitably, therefore, the destruction caused by natural 
disasters means a net loss of economic resources. Their replacement requires 
a reallocation of resources which might otherwise have been used to further 
the development process. It is in terms of their opportunity cost incurred 
that disaster impact should be measured and that the beneﬁts of mitigation 
programs should be assessed.

Resource Requirement

16. After mapping hazards and analyzing vulnerability, the resources 
required for mitigating the risks need to be evaluated. If the risk of potential 
losses is great, a correspondingly high level of resources will probably be 
required for mitigation. The aim is to achieve a balance between risks and 
resources. Disaster preparedness seeks to identify these resources prior to the 
onset of emergency situations.

Decision Making

17. Having reached the stage in the assessment process where information 
on hazards and vulnerability has been collected and analyzed in terms of 
potential losses and resources available to address identiﬁed risks, the next 
step is to make decisions on who or what to protect and to what level of safety. 
One option might be not to proceed with mitigation on the grounds that it 
is excessively expensive to provide protection, or that the risks are too slight 
to be considered. In most cases, the decision to proceed will require further 
analysis of the degree of protection to be provided and of the relative priorities 
of assets to be protected.

The procedures for decision making on mitigation matters vary between 
industrialized and developing countries, depending on the amount, detail 
and quality of background material available and the resources that may be 
mobilized for introducing and sustaining mitigation programs. The usual 
method used in industrialized countries to determine how much a country, 
region, or town should invest in ﬂood protection measures is based on cost-
beneﬁt analysis. The technique is not as advanced in the case of earthquake 
hazard due to the large number of variables in the economic risk assessment. 
However, the cost of upgrading a structure to make it earthquake resistant 
for a particular severity of seismic event can be easily calculated where the 

2 Zupka, D. 1988 Economic Impact of Disaster. UNDRO News, January/February. p.19.

330 Disaster Management

necessary expertise is available, thus enabling a decision on such investments 
to be reached. However, very few developing countries have used cost-beneﬁt 
analysis to establish standards of protection. The reasons for this include the 
difﬁculty of obtaining accurate data on direct and indirect loss potential, or the 
lack of economic appraisal skills. In the absence of such techniques, decisions 
are currently made on the basis of considered judgement and the best advice 
available based on practical knowledge and experience.

Decision Making – Economic Appraisal

18. There are three stages in cost-beneﬁt analysis in the context of disaster 
mitigation activities,13 beginning with the enumeration of all the beneﬁts and 
costs of an anticipated activity to reduce risks. Next, these costs and beneﬁts are 
expressed in money terms. Finally, all future beneﬁts and costs are discounted 
into present value terms. Based on this analysis, which includes a probabilistic 
estimate of the likelihood of the hazard, decision makers can select the option 
in which the present value of a mitigation proposal is positive and greater than 
that of available alternative actions. There are three methodological problems 
with these three steps. First, there are problems of quantifying many of the 
social, psychological, or political risks in economic analysis and assigning 
prices to human life, emotional stress, or political upheaval. Economists using 
cost-beneﬁt analysis would ﬁnd it impossible to determine the monetary value 
of avoiding such losses or disturbances or to measure the value of security 
which comes, for example, from living in an earthquake-resistant house or on 
ﬂood-protected land. It is even more difﬁcult to evaluate the political beneﬁt 
derived by a government which imposes safe building codes or, conversely, 
the potential political cost to a government which does not.

The second problem of cost-beneﬁt analysis is the difﬁculty in placing a monetary 
value on the loss of nonrenewable national resources such as agriculture land 
lost through erosion, landslides; or ﬂoods. Finally, there are methodological 
problems in discounting future beneﬁts and costs, and in incorporating into 
the analysis the risk of natural disasters occurring. This relates to determining 
how to handle future uncertain outcomes in relation to a host of other factors 
that may affect human existence in a disaster-prone environment. There 
are no ready solutions to resolve the limitations on assessing the costs and 
beneﬁts of mitigation measures. The lack of expertise experienced in many 
developing countries and the conﬂicting demands on scarce ﬁnancial, human, 

3 Anderson, Mary B. 1990. Analysing the Costs and Beneﬁts of Natural Disaster Responses in the Context of 

Development, Environmental Working Paper No. 29, The World Bank.

Appendix A 

331

and institutional resources further complicate the issue. Technical assistance 
may be able to provide support to ﬁll identiﬁed gaps so that political leaders 
grappling with the difﬁcult question of what to protect and to what level of 
safety may have more precise information on options open to them. Once 
mitigation measures have been identiﬁed, resources would then have to be 
mobilized at home and abroad for implementing them.

Decision Making – Levels of Safety and Priorities for Protection

19. Whether ofﬁcials use more or less rigorous cost-beneﬁt analysis or 
considered judgment, they will have to make decisions on determining levels 
of protection as well as on setting priorities. Factors that will inﬂuence their 
decision are:

• 

 the value of the area, economic asset, or building being protected 
relative to other disaster or development priorities;

• available resources;
• 

• 

 nationally or arbitrarily agreed standards (in some countries ﬂood 
protection measures only apply to 100-year return period events); 
and
 the speciﬁc aims of mitigation; for example, in the case of 
earthquake, a generally accepted objective in developing seismic 
(anti-earthquake) measures for low-income dwellings is to eliminate 
risk of injury and death, but accept a certain level of structural 
damage (this is sometimes termed “safe collapse”).

Whatever the approach, whether economic appraisal or common sense, 
the scale of expenditure on protection measures has to be established in a 
given set of conditions. Thus, a comparison can be made between the cost 
of mitigation measures and the expected beneﬁts stemming from them. The 
use of such techniques can provide guidance on what level of protection to 
provide. Economic appraisal may also offer decision makers some comparative 
information on the potential economic return of mitigation measures in 
different sectors, or of different mitigation measures in the same sector.

Deﬁning an Acceptable Level of Risk

20. Thus far, a wide range of disciplines will have been involved in mapping 
assessing, analyzing and estimating risk, hazards, and vulnerabilities. The 
product of these activities will be a comprehensive assessment of the causes 
and effects of potentially disastrous events and the provision of advice on a 
given course of action or a range of options for taking mitigation measures 

332 Disaster Management

within a set of identiﬁed constraints. The ultimate decision on the level of 
protection and on what or whom to protect will be political, taken in the 
light of available resources and the perceived importance of hazard protection 
relative to other pressing demands on the national or local budget.

All individuals and societies have to live with risk of various types and severity. 
It is utopian to imagine their entire removal. Instead, mitigation measures have 
to be accommodated considering a variety of trade-offs. As a ﬁnal step in the 
risk assessment process, therefore, governments in hazard-prone environments 
have to make decisions on what risk-taking is deemed acceptable and tolerable 
on the national scale. The cost of repeatedly devoting public funds for relief 
and rehabilitation activities following disasters must be balanced against the 
cost of providing preparedness and mitigation measures before the event. The 
acceptability or tolerance of risk is a dynamic sociopolitical process that relates 
to another dynamic context, that of ever-changing hazards and vulnerabilities. 
What one society will tolerate will not be acceptable to another. And what is 
acceptable at one stage in a society’s economic development or value system 
may change signiﬁcantly by a later stage.

Four causal factors inﬂuence change in the acceptability of risk by a given 
society:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 The development of general education and public awareness 
programs producing a heightened knowledge of vulnerability and 
of ways to secure protection at various levels of aggregation;
 General economic progress, with people no longer prepared to see 
their growing assets endangered by events that their parents may 
have tolerated: as a result, greater demand is placed on governments 
for a safer environment;
 Awareness of damage potential, with governments recognizing that 
potential losses from disasters may pose unacceptable risks for 
economic welfare and their own political survival; and
 Changing patterns of hazards and vulnerabilities, with communities 
becoming aware that new risks are posed as rivers change their 
courses, volcanoes become active after years of inactivity, poor 
families with no alternative place to live move onto disaster-prone 
ﬂoodplains, and with environmental degradation threatening the 
very Earth.

Appendix B

Warning and Warning Systems

Purpose of the Appendix

The purpose of this appendix is to outline the major factors which 

1. 
apply to disaster warning and warning systems.

The contents of the appendix are particularly related to Chapters 16 

2. 
and 17, which deal respectively with preparedness and response.

Speciﬁc references are:

• 

• 

 Chapter 16 which covers various aspects of warning and outlines 
precautionary measures that can be taken prior to disaster impact, 
if there is sufﬁcient warning lead time.
 Chapter 17 which summarizes the main requirements applicable 
to warning.

3. 
The appendix necessarily overlaps some of the information contained 
in the above references. However, it aims to amplify this information and 
provides a ready reference to the subject of warning generally.

4. 

The appendix covers:

the signiﬁcance of warning,
the disaster warning and information sequence,

• 
• 
• capability requirements for effective warning,
transmission of warning information, and
• 
factors affecting the utilisation of warning.
• 

The Signiﬁcance of Warning

5. 
The signiﬁcance of warning is well summarized in the Manual of 
Disaster Prevention and Mitigation, Preparedness Aspects, Volume 11, issued 
by the Ofﬁce of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator (UNDRO), 
which states:

334 Disaster Management

 It is axiomatic that if timely warning can be given of an impending or 
probable event which may bring disastrous consequences in its train, 
then it will be possible to reduce the severity of those consequences. 
The degree to which this reduction can be effected will depend upon 
the interplay of three main elements, namely:

• The accuracy of the warning;
• 

 The length of time between the warning’s being issued and the 
expected onset of the event; and

• The state of pre-disaster planning and readiness.

Included within this last (element) is a sub-element, that is the degree to 
which the public respond to the warning and take correct precautionary 
action.

The Disaster Warning and Information Sequence

6. 
In considering and assessing various aspects and components of 
warning and warning systems, it is useful to relate them to the sequence which 
usually applies to disaster information. A typical pattern is given below and 
while this might not apply to every single case, it illustrates in summarized 
form what is involved in providing warning of a disaster. It is interesting that 
this type of sequence applies to virtually all emergencies, ranging from, say, a 
trafﬁc accident to a major disaster.

Origin

The Crisis or Disaster Scene
 Information may be and sometimes is dormant or inactive at this stage, 
unless action is taken to make it otherwise; for example, amateur radio 
operators have sometimes been the ﬁrst activators of information 
concerning a disaster event (other agencies having been put temporarily 
out of action).

Warning/Alerting

May be from
• Ordinary source

 (Initiated by a person/citizen involved in the crisis or on the crisis 
scene); or

 
Appendix B 

335

• Special source

 By warning system; or by police/emergency service/other ofﬁcials 
who may have a special role or responsibility; or by satellite imagery 
or overﬂying aircraft.

This stage activates and starts to channel the information.

Transmission

 This is the process of moving the information from the crisis scene to 
the point where it can be assessed and acted upon.

The Methods may be

• word of mouth,
• 
• 
• 
• 

telephone/telex/facsimile,
radio,
alarm signals, 
etc.

Reception and Recording

by some form of information center which may be

• Emergency operations center
• Police HQ
• Any other relevant point or center

 The information center must normally have the capability for processing 
the information effectively, and especially for recording it accurately 
and clearly.

Display

 This may be necessary to ensure/enhance the clear recording which 
may be required at subsequent stages. It is not always mandatory; for 
instance, in minor incidents recording alone will sufﬁce.

Display may be done by
• Maps/charts,
• Display boards,
• Visual projection, and others.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
336 Disaster Management

Assessment

 The essential “information-using” phase when information is examined 
with regard to its own signiﬁcance and its relevance to other information 
or factors on hand.

May be done

• By one individual acting alone.
• By one individual acting on advice of his staff.
• 

In conference.

Decision Making

 The critical phase or peak via which the information is translated into 
action.

The decision(s) may be made

• By the individual who carries overall responsibility for the action
 By the responsible individual in consultation with his immediate 
• 
staff/specialist advisers.

Action

The extension of the decision making into a line of action.

It may be
• 

 Dynamic, such as setting off a course of operations (e.g., a 
survey, a search, an evacuation, a deployment of resources, a 
warning or instruction to the public).
 Static, such as remaining on stand-by pending further 
information, or judging that no additional action is warranted.

• 

Finality

The stage when all action in relation to the information is complete.

This may mean

• All clear after a warning,
• Stand down,
• End of an operational phase,
• 

 Absorption of the particular information into a subsequent 
phase/edition of information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B 

337

7. 
The foregoing pattern or sequence is a useful indicator to a number of 
key requirements, if warning is to be effectively obtained and utilized. These 
requirements are outlined below.

Capability Requirements for Effective Warning

As mentioned brieﬂy in Chapter 16, the effectiveness of a warning 

8. 
system depends on certain interrelated capabilities. These are:

• Capability to receive international warning

 For example, cyclone warnings from tropical cyclone warning 
centers in various locations; tsunami warnings from the Tsunami 
Warning Center in Hawaii; meteorological indications from weather 
satellites of possibly developing threats.
• Capability to initiate in-country warnings

 Necessary in cases such as ﬂoods, landslides, volcanic eruptions, 
earthquake (if prior indicators are available), major releases of 
hazardous substance.
 Capability to transmit warning from national level and other key 
government levels

• 

 Mostly done by radio links or broadcast systems.
• Capability to transmit warning at local community level

 May be done by local radio stations, sirens, loud hailers, bells, 
messengers.

• Capability to receive warning and act upon it

This requires:
- possession of or access to a radio receiver or similar facility,
- 
- 
- 

being in hearing/seeing distance of signals,
knowing what various warnings mean, and
knowing what action to take.

9. 
If there are limitations or disruptions to any of these capabilities, 
warning may not be totally effective. Most limitations or disruptions tend 
to be caused by the disaster events themselves (e.g., the inability of a radio 
broadcast system to function because of cyclone damage or damage to power 
supplies, including stand-by power facilities).

10. 
In situations where there is no advance warning of disaster (e.g., a 
sudden earthquake), the warning system is automatically bypassed and disaster 
response has to be initiated at the post-impact stage. However, the system 
(or at least parts of it) usually remains available for passing vital information 
concerning post-impact action, including community advice and direction.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
338 Disaster Management

Transmission of Warning Information

11. While some warning information may be conveyed by other means 
(e.g., alarm systems and visual signals), most information is transmitted by 
telecommunications links. For instance, teleprinter links are widely used 
for conveying meteorological information. Some countries possess special 
communications networks for disaster purposes but, even so, other networks 
also tend to be involved. Many countries therefore make arrangements to 
utilize existing communications facilities to the optimum extent for disaster 
purposes (including warning). A typical example would be:

• Warning from external sources

 Radio, telex, telephone, and in some cases satellite links, channelled 
to a central in-country authority; e.g., a national meteorological 
center or national observatory.

• 

 In-country transmission of warning information
 Warning may be originated by various agencies; e.g., a meteorological 
center, a volcanological monitoring system, an industrial safety 
system, a local or regional government headquarters. Information 
may be passed via:
- 
- 

a discrete disaster network;
 a police network, used for disaster operations coordination 
(because of its wide national coverage and, probably, its 24-
hour manning);
a national government network;

- 
- NGO networks, if so arranged under ofﬁcial disaster plans.

• Public broadcast/dissemination of warning information

 The authority for and system of dissemination of warning 
information must be clearly laid down in disaster plans. For example, 
a national or regional meteorological ofﬁce would normally monitor 
and clear the format of a cyclone/windstorm warning. Broadcast of 
warning would be undertaken by national/regional broadcasting 
systems. Other means of dissemination (e.g., by sirens, loud hailers, 
warning pennants) would be undertaken by police, emergency 
services, local government authorities, etc. in accordance with 
disaster plans.

• 

 Notiﬁcation of warning to neighboring countries and international 
assistance agencies.
 This may be done by various agencies/channels; e.g., diplomatic 
missions, United Nations agencies (especially UNDP/UNDRO), 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B 

339

Red Cross, international church/welfare bodies, the media. Such 
notiﬁcation can often provide useful advance warning to outside 
agencies that their assistance may be required.

• 

• 

 Good-neighbor assistance in dissemination of warning
 Cases are on record where countries have assisted a disaster-stricken 
neighbor by broadcasting warning and other information. This is 
particularly valuable when the broadcast/communications capability 
of the stricken country has been damaged and/or disrupted by 
the ongoing disaster. Preparedness measures can help ensure the 
efﬁcacy of this kind of arrangement.

 Back-up s ystems
 Earmarking and inclusion in plans and operating procedures of 
other networks which could be called upon for back-up purposes; 
e.g., networks of individual government departments, private sector 
networks, aeronautical and maritime networks.

Factors Affecting the Utilization of Warning

12. 
In responding to disaster, much will obviously depend on the action 
taken by disaster management authorities and the general public following 
receipt of warning. Such action may be inﬂuenced by a number of speciﬁc 
factors related to individual circumstances and particular types of disaster. 
However, certain factors will tend to apply generally. These factors (some of 
which relate to the UNDRO quotation in paragraph 5) are outlined below.

13. Warning Lead Time and Accuracy

Good warning lead time is clearly a valuable factor in response from 
both disaster management and public reaction viewpoints. Under best-case 
scenarios, it facilitates optimum:

• Readiness;
• Pre-impact precautionary measures (see Chapter 16);
• Activation (of organization, systems and facilities, etc.); and
• Mobilization.

However, long-warning lead time may mean that original forecasts concerning 
the threat (e.g., its severity and timing) proved to be inaccurate, resulting 
perhaps in unnecessary reaction. Often, therefore, it is a matter of ﬁne 
judgment by senior disaster management authorities in deciding the timing 

 
 
340 Disaster Management

of their initial response action (see also paragraph 16 concerning warning 
overkill). The following issues are critical to get the best use out of available 
warning:

• 

• 

• 

 The authorities responsible for originating warning must clearly 
understand the difﬁculties and repercussions which inaccurate 
warnings impose on both disaster management and the public, and 
should ﬁne-tune their systems and procedures accordingly.
 Disaster management authorities should attune themselves and 
their operational concepts to minimal warning situations. In this 
way, they can likely maximize their utilization of any warning 
period, long or short.
 Where disasters tend to be regular (e.g., seasonal ﬂooding), past 
records will provide useful warning guidelines for both disaster 
management and the public. In fact, the public may develop more 
faith in such guidelines, rather then follow ongoing forecasts; this 
point needs to be watched by disaster managers, especially at the 
local level.

14. 

Framework of Planning and Organization

From the preceding information in this appendix, it will be readily 
appreciated that many agencies and individuals are involved in the provision 
and utilization of warning. It follows that effective coordination is vital. This, 
in turn, indicates that the framework of planning and organisation within 
which the warning system has to operate must be kept at peak effectiveness. In 
fact, a good way to test this framework is to check it, step by step, against the 
criteria of paragraphs 6 and 8 above. This check is also useful when a disaster 
management organization is being initially set up.

Obviously, therefore, the main needs in planning and organisation are that:

• 

• 

 Plans must contain adequate information and direction concerning 
the coordinated utilization of the warning system; and

 The organizational structure must facilitate the best possible 
functioning of the warning system and cater for the provision and 
maintenance of the necessary facilities and systems, including 
communications links.

Inadequacies in planning and organization (and associated preparedness) will 
affect not only the utilization of warning but, of equal importance, its acquisition 
as well. In this regard, Chapter 16 lists some important points concerning:

Appendix B 

341

• Warning systems;
• Readiness;
• Activation;
• Provision for non-warning situations;
• Testing and practice of warning systems; and
• 

 Precautionary measures prior to disaster impact, if adequate 
warning is available.

15. Public Awareness and Participation

Public awareness and understanding of the warning system plus 
community capability to participate in related activities (e.g., precautionary 
measures, evacuation procedures) constitute a key link in the total warning 
chain. Chapter 22, which deals with various facets of public awareness, 
emphasizes the need for measures which will help maintain awareness levels.

16. Warning Overkill

What might be called warning overkill can adversely affect reaction 
to and utilization of warning. For instance, neither disaster management 
authorities nor the general public can be kept at a high state of standby/ 
readiness over long periods. The use of warning must therefore be selective in 
the sense that it avoids, as far as possible:

• 

• 

 Continuous awareness warnings which eventually become 
disregarded (this needs to be particularly watched if disasters are 
seasonal, when it can be possible to overemphasize such warnings);
 Repeated false alarms because warnings are issued for very low-level 
threats, or because the threats are not sufﬁciently and accurately 
diagnosed before warnings are issued.

In other words, there is usually a peak in warning/readiness/public awareness 
beyond which effective reaction will rapidly diminish.

An interesting example of the false alarm syndrome occurred in Australia in 
1974 when the northern city of Darwin was virtually ﬂattened by Cyclone 
Tracy. Although warnings of the cyclone’s approach were timely, accurate, 
and clear, the general public paid inadequate regard to them and suffered 
accordingly. One of the main reasons for this was that only a short time 
previously a cyclone had tracked toward the city in an almost identical way, 
only to alter course prior to expected impact.

342 Disaster Management

This question of warning overkill is obviously a difﬁcult one for disaster 
managers to handle accurately. It does depend greatly on the efﬁcacy of 
the warning sequence (paragraph 6 above) and the capability requirements 
outlined in paragraph 8. It also requires appropriate study by disaster managers 
and those responsible for initialising warnings, plus simulations of possible 
disaster scenarios.

17. Training

One wrongly transmitted or recorded message can disrupt the total 
warning process; and there is no doubt that expert and professional operation 
of all parts of the warning system must be a clear disaster management aim. 
Consequently, training requirements need to receive high priority. One 
advantage here is that training on the relevant communications procedures 
and information management is usually interesting for participants. Also, 
tests and simulations are not difﬁcult to organize and implement. It should 
therefore be reasonably easy to meet the training requirement for the use of 
warning.

Appendix C

Survey and Assessment

Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to outline the main considerations 

1. 
which apply to the survey and assessment of the after-effects of a disaster.

2. 
The appendix is primarily related to the response activities outlined 
in Chapter 17. It contains occasional reiteration from that chapter and this is 
intentional for purposes of emphasis.

3. 

The appendix covers the following main aspects:

identiﬁcation of information needs,

importance of survey and assessment,
scope of survey and assessment,

• 
• 
• basis of planning,
• 
• use of existing information,
• nature of crisis information,
• 
• communication and coordination of information,
• warning lead time, 
• post-impact action, and
support arrangements.
• 

systems and facilities,

The Importance of Survey and Assessment

Survey and assessment is critical in responding to disaster because it 

4. 
covers two vital areas:

• 

• 

 First, it identiﬁes what the particular disaster has done to the area 
concerned.
 Second, it indicates what needs to be done in terms of response 
(and later, recovery).

344 Disaster Management

The Scope of Survey and Assessment

In practice, survey and assessment may comprise a series of actions, the 
5. 
timing of which is largely determined by the particular disaster circumstance. 
However, the prime objectives of such actions are usually:

• To obtain a ﬁrst general picture of the post-impact situation.
• 

 To establish the state of accessibility into and within the stricken 
area for purposes of rescue, medical relief, supply, and other urgent 
action.
 To determine the needs of stricken communities in terms of 
immediate relief and long-term recovery.
 To determine the levels of damage which have occurred to buildings 
and structures, for purposes of restoration and reconstruction.
 To assess or verify crop losses which may need to be made good by 
seed or foodgrain imports.

• 

• 

• 

Other survey and assessment action may be needed for specialist 

6. 
reasons, for instance:

• 

• 

 To establish the spread of contamination from hazardous substances 
(e.g., radiation toxic risks).
 To establish other threats which might affect the health of stricken 
communities.

The Basis of Planning

7. 
The success of survey and assessment depends considerably on the 
basis of planning, organization, and preparedness measures. Survey and 
assessment action therefore needs to be carefully covered in disaster plans and 
any associated standard operating procedures. This is often done by:

• 

• 

 Allocating overall responsibility for coordinating survey and 
assessment to one authority (e.g., the police, because of their 
organizational spread and availability of communications; or local 
government authorities) and
 Allocating detailed areas of responsibility to various resource 
organizations (e.g., agriculture assessment to the Department of 
Agriculture; casualty and health assessment to medical and health 
agencies).

No matter how this aspect is dealt with, clear allocation of responsibility is most 
important. Otherwise, under the pressure of post-impact events, attempts to 

Appendix C 

345

secure adequate and accurate information can become confused; and when 
this happens, overall response can be affected. There must therefore be a good 
basis of planning for survey and assessment.

Identiﬁcation of Information Needs

It is necessary to establish before disaster strikes what sort of information 
8. 
is likely to be needed. This can be done through a fairly simple process of 
deﬁnition, as follows:

• Deﬁne the likely threats.
• Deﬁne the effects likely to arise from these threats.
• Deﬁne what sort of information is needed to deal with these effects.

For example, information is usually needed on casualties, destruction of homes 
and property, damage to essential services, evacuation needs or possibilities, 
availability of food supplies, and so on. These areas of information can be 
readily established as items of preparedness.

The important point here, of course, is that before we are called upon to 
respond we need to know, quite simply and clearly, what we are looking for 
in terms of information.

9. 
This may sound an easy and simple matter. In fact, it is. The problem is 
that so often disaster management authorities make it difﬁcult for themselves 
because they do not clearly identify their information needs in the planning and 
preparedness stage. On the other hand, where information needs have been 
clearly spelled out in disaster plans and procedures, this has paid handsome 
dividends during response action.

The Use of Existing Information

10. 
It should be borne in mind that some information needs can be met 
from data that already exists. Thus, before survey and assessment is planned, 
it is necessary to identify what existing information may be used. Examples of 
such information may include:

Information from previous disasters,

• 
• Map information,
• Census information, and
• Specialist information of various kinds.

Such information needs to be of easy access when required.

346 Disaster Management

The Nature of Crisis Information

11. Crisis information, the information arising from the disaster area itself, 
must be:

• accurate,
• as up-to-date as possible, and
• 

 sufﬁciently detailed to facilitate the organization of an accurate 
response.

Thus, taking the medical and health area as a brief summarized example, the 
overall purpose of survey action is likely to be:

• To ascertain the nature and extent of casualties.
• 

 To assess the immediate medical and health needs of the stricken 
community.
 To assess surviving medical and health resources.

• 

Detailed information needs would therefore include:

• categorization of casualties;
• 

• 

 state of the surviving medical and health system (including medical 
and health facilities, personnel, equipment supplies, medical 
transport, etc.);
 medical and health needs (including facilities, personnel, equipment, 
supplies, transport, etc.);
• medical evacuation needs;
• 

 future risk factors (including sanitation problems, water supplies, 
overcrowding, nutritional problems; see also paragraph 6 above); 
and
 self-help and volunteer resources (e.g., personnel, improvised 
accommodation) from within the community.

• 

12. Crisis information would also be required to cover other areas such as:

food and agriculture,

• essential services,
• 
• communications,
transport, and
• 
• housing and shelter.

Appendix C 

347

Systems and Facilities

13. The process suggested in paragraphs 8–12 could be expected to narrow 
down the situation so that it is clear what information needs to be sought. The 
next question, therefore, is what systems and facilities are usually available for 
acquiring and monitoring crisis information. These systems and facilities can 
be divided into two broad categories, as described below.

14. Basic Systems

Emergency services

 Police, ﬁre authorities, ambulance services, civil defense (or similar 
organizations).

Government departments and agencies

Those which have disaster-related roles.
 For example, public works agencies are usually involved in assessing 
damage to roads, etc.; medical and health departments have a self-
evident role in their specialist area; local government ofﬁcials or 
teams have a role at that level.

 Nongovernment organizations

 NGOs can also provide useful support, as long as their responsibilities 
are clearly deﬁned, agreed, and accepted.

Media

 The media can also contribute information, though it is not always 
prepared to regard itself as a formal part of the counter-disaster 
system, even temporarily.

General Public

 Reports from victims or observers in the disaster area are also 
useful.

Special systems

 Satellite information (especially for movement of cyclones and 
major ﬂooding and landslides after earthquake).

15. Emergency Systems

Air survey

 Visual air surveys are usually valuable, especially for initial surveys. 
The “gyro-stabilized human eyeball” is an effective information-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
348 Disaster Management

gathering mechanism. However, its owner does need to be 
experienced in air survey, otherwise inaccuracies can occur.

 Photographic air surveys are also invaluable, particularly for obtaining 
a ﬁrst assessment of the post-impact situation. Line overlaps and 
mosaics are very useful when the disaster is widespread.

Ground Survey

 Ground surveys can include waterborne surveys of coastal areas 
and inland waterways. Their particular value is the collection of 
 on-site data, including contact with the stricken community. These 
surveys usually need to be led by ofﬁcials specialized in various 
ﬁelds.

 Air-ground s urvey

 In many cases, helicopter capability has proved invaluable for 
providing a form of urgent air-ground survey. This can be done by 
using a team of, say, an administrative ofﬁcial, a medical ofﬁcer, and 
a disaster management ofﬁcial. A series of speedy visits carried out 
in this way is not only extremely valuable for providing an urgent 
initial assessment; it also helps assure stricken communities that 
assistance is under way.

Further information on initial surveys and follow-up surveys is contained in 
paragraphs 21–22 below.

Communication and Co-ordination of Information

16. With regard to the communication and coordination of information, 
various problem areas can be identiﬁed from case study material. These include 
the following:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 amount and variety of information which may be generated by 
the disaster; some of this are often irrelevant and can confuse the 
assessment process;
 submission of information which is inaccurate; for example, from 
inexperienced observers;
 large number of transmission links or networks which may be 
involved; this may slow down the collation of information; and
 general effect of these and other factors which results in what is 
often called “information convergence” and which may choke the 
information management system, at least temporarily.

 
 
 
Appendix C 

349

In practice, what this may mean is that it is not always possible to achieve 
the ideal situation whereby survey and assessment consists of a tidy, orderly 
process in which information is accurately collected, smoothly transmitted, 
and precisely coordinated.

It is important for disaster managers to be aware of this possibility, especially 
where disaster circumstances are severe.

17. Standard Formats

The use of standardized concise formats through the survey and 
assessment process can help to minimize the problems of communication and 
coordination. This is not always practicable but is worth working toward as an 
overall survey and assessment guideline (see also paragraphs 22–23).

18. Communication Networks and Links

There may some basic conﬂict in the use of communication networks 
and links because, in principle, it is not advisable to change normal day-to-day 
systems and procedures to meet disaster circumstances. At the same time, 
the information being transmitted over basic systems may, under disaster 
conditions, be required at coordinating points which are different from the 
normal ones. For example it may be necessary for certain emergency services 
to report information directly to, say, a mobile EOC.

The problems here are surmountable. They can be overcome by the use of 
emergency links and so on. However, these problems do need to be resolved 
during the planning process and not left until response operations are 
imminent or under way.

19. 

Importance of Emergency Operations Centers

The importance of effective EOCs in the process of survey and assessment 
cannot be overemphasized. Unfortunately, numerous cases are on record where 
this importance has been disregarded or overlooked. The results are usually 
very disruptive to the disaster-management process. For instance, survey 
information and other reports are often available from affected areas. However, 
this information cannot be put together without a reasonable EOC system. This 
results in inaccurate decision making, slow or inappropriate response action, 
and unnecessary additional hardship for people in the stricken area.

350 Disaster Management

Warning Lead Time

20. Warning lead time has an important bearing on effective survey and 
assessment. If good warning lead time of the type, timing, and likely severity 
of an oncoming disaster is available, this helps in terms of readiness to carry 
out survey and assessment. It also indicates the kind of post-impact surveys 
which may be needed.

Post-Impact Action

21. 

Initial Surveys

Usually, the most important ﬁrst action after disaster impact is to obtain 
an overall idea of the extent and severity of the effects. Initial surveys are 
therefore vitally important. In many circumstances, however, there tend to be 
constraints on these initial surveys. For example:

• 

• 

• 

 Weather conditions following a cyclone (heavy rain and poor 
visibility) tend to hamper air survey.
 With an earthquake, extensive destruction and damage can make 
accurate assessment difﬁcult.
 With ﬂoods also it is often difﬁcult to make a quick, accurate 
assessment.

There also tends to be the general problem that, on the ground, access to and 
movement within most disaster areas can be difﬁcult. This especially applies 
initially which is, of course, a critical period for information gathering.

Sometimes, international assistance can be invaluable for initial survey. 
Specialist reconnaissance aircraft can have a quick response and excellent 
facilities for photographic and visual survey. If it is possible (as is sometimes 
the case) for the aircraft to carry an ofﬁcial from the stricken country to help 
identify affected areas, this is advantageous. However, once again, this kind of 
action depends greatly on adequate preparedness.

With initial survey generally, wide use can made on both rotary and ﬁxed wing 
aircraft. However, it does need to be remembered that visual air survey can 
be prone to inaccuracies, especially without factual back-up reports from the 
ground; and this can often be the case immediately post-impact.

Appendix C 

351

22. Follow-up Surveys

The limitations of initial surveys obviously underline the importance 
of follow-up surveys. In most cases the only way of achieving these follow-up 
surveys is by hard, persistent work on the ground, which emphasizes the need 
for trained teams and a well-organized system.

A case study offers some useful pointers on these follow-up surveys. In this 
instance, a major survey became necessary because information from several 
earlier surveys was obviously incomplete. Particular points of interest were:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 First, a careful assessment was made of information from the earlier 
surveys. A lot of this earlier information had, incidentally, been 
gathered by international assistance resources during the early relief 
operations (when they delivered food and shelter materials, etc.)

 Second, the areas to be surveyed and the respective priorities were 
established.

 Third, careful deﬁnition was made of the additional information 
needed. This was not too difﬁcult because ongoing relief operations 
provided a good guide to the important information categories.

 Fourth, resources to carry out the survey were assessed and use was 
made of various personnel groups. For example: including overseas 
emergency teams who had been ﬂown in to help in the initial 
response operations; the local police, including their mobile force 
element; various government specialists; a variety of communications 
resources; teams of local inhabitants, under village leaders.

With these arrangements and resources, the survey was successfully completed 
and the necessary information obtained. However, it then became necessary 
to borrow a computer analyst from a neighboring country to make full use of 
all information collected. It is also of interest that, in this particular survey, the 
forms for recording information were specially drawn up beforehand and not 
taken from a standard manual or plan. This raises the point that there can be 
ﬂexibility in the format used for surveys. The important basic requirements 
are to establish what information is being sought and then to follow a few 
commonsense guidelines and procedures.

352 Disaster Management

23. Development of Information Picture

The progressive development of the information picture is absolutely 
crucial; and “picture” is the operative word. The coordinator or disaster 
executive does need a well-collated display from which to make critical 
response decisions. The exact form of that display will obviously depend 
on individual circumstances and facilities; but fairly simple status boards 
and an accurate map display will usually sufﬁce. An important point worth 
remembering is that the information picture (apart from its obvious use in 
allocating response tasks) also helps the coordinator to decide what additional 
survey and assessment action needs to be taken.

Support Arrangements

24. The foregoing suggested measures obviously need various support 
arrangements. For instance:

• Training and Preparedness

This needs to cover aspects such as:
- 

 Adequate pre-brieﬁng of those persons within the counter-disaster 
system who are likely to carry out survey and assessment tasks.

- Designation of team leaders and deputies, as necessary.
- 

 The provision of guidelines and report forms (see the sample 
survey format at the end of this appendix).
Practice runs.

- 

• Administration and Logistics

 For instance, transport and movement difﬁculties can often lead to 
delays in mounting both initial and follow-up surveys. Terrain can 
also cause logistic problems. These aspects, which must obviously be 
related to individual circumstances, need to be carefully considered 
and their effects anticipated as far as possible in guidelines and 
procedures.

Summary

25. The information contained in this appendix is necessarily a fairly 
limited coverage of survey and assessment, primarily intended as a basis to 
be developed for individual requirements. In summary, the following are 
emphasised as key points:

• need for a sound basis of planning and preparedness;
• need to know clearly what information is being sought;

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C 

353

• need for astute utilization of available systems and facilities; and
• 

 need to tackle the survey and assessment requirement, on a prepared 
and organized basis, because it will not wait, it will not go away, and 
people will suffer and die if survey and assessment is not effective.

This sample survey format is reprinted with acknowledgment, from Post-Disaster 
Assessment by John R. Campbell and Joseph Chung sponsored by the Paciﬁc Islands 
Development, East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. This manual was the outcome 
of a Workshop held at P1DP, of which the author of this handbook was a member.

Medical Survey

Village/Settlement _________________________ Date ________________
Island/District. ____________________________
Adults (over 15 years)* ________
Population: 
Children (5 to 15 years)* _______
Infants (below 5 years)* ________

Medical Facilities 
(circle appropriate answer) 
Clinic/Hospital/No Facility 

Destroyed/ 
Damaged but Usable/ 
Undamaged 
Beds Undamaged ___________
Beds Occupied _____________ 
Beds Available ______________ 

Disease Risk Factors:
Toilets: 
Destroyed _________________ 
Damaged __________________ 
Serviceable ________________ 
Is there any problem with the 
disposal of sewage___________ 

Medical Supplies:
Lost ________________________
___________________________
Remaining __________________
___________________________
Needed ____________________
___________________________

Medical Personnel (by number):
Doctors Available ___________
Nurses Available ____________

Other Risks:
Stagnant Water ______________
Poor Drainage _______________
Poor Hygiene Conditions ______
Substandard Kitchens _________
Overcrowding _______________
Insect/Rat Infestation _________
Is Spraying Necessary ________

Remarks:
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Name of Surveyor
____________________________________________

* 

 The ages given here are intended only as a guide. In some countries a different age breakdown 
is used to distinguish adults from children and children from infants.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D

Examples of Disaster Legislation

COOK ISLANDS

The legislation for the Cook Islands is given below.

Analysis

Interpretation 

Title 
1. Short Title 
2. 
3. Chief Hurricane Safety 
 Ofﬁcer 
4. Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcers 
5. Functions and Powers of 
Chief Hurricane Safety 

 Ofﬁcer 
6. Delegation of Powers of 
Chief Hurricane Safety 

 Ofﬁcer 
7. Hurricane Safety 
Committee 

8. Functions of Hurricane 
Safety Committee 

9. Preparation and Approval 
of National Hurricane 

Safety Plans

10. Obligation to conform
to operative plan 
11. State of Warning 
12. Declaration of State of

Emergency 

13. Compensation for injury
and loss of or damage to
personal property 
14. Protection from liability
15. Requisitioning powers
16. Evacuation of places and

buildings
17. Obstruction or

impersonation of ofﬁcers

18. Penalty for offences
19. Regulations
20. Annual Report

An Act to Provide for Hurricane Safety

18 May 1973
BE IT ENACTED by the Legislative Assembly of the Cook Islands in Session 
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:

1. 
2. 

Short Title – This Act may be cited as the Hurricane Safety Act 1973
Interpretation – In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
356 Disaster Management

 “Minister” means the Minister charged with the responsibility of 
hurricane safety.

3. 

Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer
(1) The Minister shall from time to time by notice in the Gazette appoint-
(a) A Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, stationed in Rarotonga who 
shall be charged with the duty of carrying this Act to effect; and
(b) A Deputy Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, stationed in Rarotonga, 
to act in case of the illness, absence, death or removal of the 
Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer.

 (2) The Deputy Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer while so acting, shall 
exercise the duties and shall have the powers and authorities of the 
Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, and the fact that he so acts shall be 
sufﬁcient evidence of his authority to do so.

4. 

Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcers
(1) The Chief Hurricane Ofﬁcer shall from time to time appoint–

(a) Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcers, who will be in charge of Hurricane 
Safety arrangements for the island or district to which they are 
appointed:

(b) Supervisors, who will be in charge of Safety Centres and posts 

to which they are appointed:

(c) Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcers for each village or tapere on the 

recommendation by the Village Committee for that area:

(d) Such other ofﬁcers as in the opinion of the Chief Hurricane 
Safety Ofﬁcer are required in any island to implement the 
provisions of this Act:

(e) A substitute for any ofﬁcer appointed under this section to act 
in the case of the illness, absence, death or removal of that 
ofﬁcer. The substitute while so acting, shall exercise the duties 
and have the powers and authorities of the ofﬁcer for whom 
he is acting, and the fact that any substitute so acts shall be 
sufﬁcient evidence of his authority to do so.

 (2) Any reference in this Act to one of the ofﬁcers appointed under this 
section shall be deemed to include any substitute appointed for that 
ofﬁcer.

 (3) Every person appointed under this Act shall exercise his duties and 
functions subject to the control of the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer; 
and shall comply with any directions received from him from time to 
time.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

357

5. 

Functions and powers of Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer
(1) The Functions of the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer shall be–

(a) To advise and assist the Minister in all matters relating to 

hurricane safety:

(b) To exercise and perform such functions, duties and powers 
with respect to hurricane safety as are conferred or imposed on 
him by this Act.

 (2) Without limiting the generality of the provisions of subsection 
(1) of this section, the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer shall have the 
following speciﬁc functions:

(a) The co-ordination of the planning and execution generally of 

hurricane safety measures:

(b) The taking of all steps necessary to provide, or to arrange the 
provision of, or otherwise to render readily available, personnel, 
material, and services adequate for the effective carrying out of 
hurricane safety:

(c) The direction and control for the purposes of this Act of 
personnel, material, and services available and at his disposal 
for hurricane safety purpose.

 (3) In the exercise of his functions, the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer 
may –

(a) Co-ordinate the use of, and during a state of warning or of 
emergency use, the personnel, material, and services made 
available by Departments of State, other Government agencies, 
statutory corporations, public bodies, other organizations, and 
otherwise for the purpose of hurricane safety, and in particular, 
without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions of 
this paragraph, for-
(i) The provision of transport;
(ii) The removal of endangered persons and casualties from 
any area affected by hurricane emergency to areas of safety 
or to hospitals;

(iii) The affording of medical care and attention to casualties;
(iv) The relief of distress and suffering;
(v) The accommodation, feeding, care, and protection of 

persons;

(vi) The provision of other services necessary for the welfare of 

the public;

(vii) The purposes of this Act generally as may be directed by 

the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer;

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
358 Disaster Management

(b) Enter into arrangements with any person whereby that person 
gives or undertakes to give his services or those of his staff, 
whether individually or in units under the control of that 
person, for the purpose of carrying out such hurricane safety 
measures as may be agreed upon:

(c) Devise, promote, and carry out, or cause to be carried out, 
research investigations into matters relating to hurricane safety, 
and promote and carry out, or cause to be carried out, the 
dissemination of information and advice on matters relating to 
hurricane safety:

(d) Promote and carry out, or cause to be carried out, the training 

of personnel for hurricane safety purposes.

 (4) During a state of warning or emergency the Chief Hurricane Safety 
Ofﬁcer shall have and may exercise, in addition to the functions and 
powers speciﬁed in this section, such functions and powers as may be 
conferred on him by regulations made under this Act.

6. 

Delegation of powers of Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer
 (1) The Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer may from time to time, by 
writing under his hand, either generally or particularly, delegate to any 
employee of the Crown or any statutory corporation all or any of the 
powers exercisable by the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer under this 
Act, except this power of delegation.

 (2) Subject to any general or special directions given or conditions 
attached by the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, any person to whom any 
powers are delegated under this section may exercise those powers in 
the same manner and with the same effect as if they had been conferred 
on him directly by this section and not by delegation.

 (3) Every person purporting to act pursuant to any delegation under 
this section shall be presumed to be acting in accordance with the terms 
of the delegation in the absence of truth to the contrary.

 (4) Any delegation under this section may be made to a speciﬁc employee 
or to employees of a speciﬁed class, or may be made to the holder or 
holders for the time being of a speciﬁed ofﬁce or class of ofﬁces.

 (5) Every delegation under this section, shall be revocable in writing at 
will, and no such delegation shall prevent exercise of any power by the 
Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer.

 
 
 
Appendix D 

359

 (6) Every delegation under this section shall, until revoked, continue 
in force according to its tenor. In the event of the Chief Hurricane Safety 
Ofﬁcer by whom any such delegation has been made ceasing to hold 
ofﬁce, it shall continue to have effect as if made by the person for the 
time being holding ofﬁce as Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer.

7. 

Hurricane Safety Committee
 (1) For the purposes of this Act there shall be a Committee, to be called 
the Hurricane Safety Committee.

(2) The Committee shall consist of –

(a) The Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, who shall be Chairman;
(b) The Superintendent of Police;
(c) The Director of Works;
(d) The Superintendent of Radio;
(e) The Director of Health;
(f) Chief Postmaster;
(g) Secretary of Internal Affairs;
(h) Such other persons as are appointed by the Chief Hurricane 

Safety Ofﬁcer with the approval of the Minister.

Functions of Hurricane Safety Committee –
 (1) The general functions of the Hurricane Safety Committee shall be 
to advise and assist the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer in planning and 
implementing all measures considered necessary or desirable for the 
establishment, maintenance, and effective operation of hurricane safety.

(2) The Committee shall determine its own procedure.

Preparation and approval of National Hurricane Safety plans –
 (1) Not later than the ﬁrst day of November in each year the Chief 
Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer shall forward to the Minister a national plan in 
respect of hurricane safety for the immediately ensuing hurricane season.

 (2) Where the Minister is satisﬁed that any national plan prepared under 
this section provides adequately for hurricane safety measures, he may 
approve the plan, and the plan shall thereupon be deemed to be operative.

8. 

9. 

10. 

 Obligation to conform to operative plan – Every department of state, other 
government agency, or statutory corporation required or authorised by 
any operative plan, or regulations made under this Act to undertake any 
hurricane safety measures or to exercise any functions shall take all necessary 
steps to undertake those measures or to exercise those functions.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
360 Disaster Management

11. 

State of Warning –
 (1) A state of warning shall exist from the time a preliminary warning 
is publicly notiﬁed by such means of communication as are available by 
the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, or by the New Zealand Meteorological 
Service.

 (2) The state of warning shall continue until an all clear signal is publicly 
notiﬁed by such means of communication as are available by the Chief 
Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer or the New Zealand Meteorological Service.

12. Declaration of state of emergency –

(1) if at any time it appears to the Minister that –

(a) A civil emergency has occurred or may occur; and
(b) The emergency is or is likely to be of such extent or magnitude 
or severity that national measures are necessary or desirable in 
respect of it, he may declare a state of emergency for any island 
or islands, as he sees ﬁt.

 (2) The Minister shall forthwith give public notice, by such means 
of communications as are available, of every declaration of a state of 
emergency made by him under subsection (1) of this section; and the 
declaration shall be gazetted as soon as practicable.

 (3) A state of emergency shall terminate on the seventh day after the 
date on which it was declared.

13. Compensation for injury and loss of or damage to personal property –

 (1) Every person who while carrying out hurricane safety work, or 
participating in hurricane safety training, under the control of any 
person appointed under sections 3 or 4 of this Act, suffers bodily injury 
or loss or damage to his personal property, shall be entitled to receive 
compensation equal to –

(a) All expenses directly incurred as a result of the injury; or
(b) The value of any personal property that has been lost; or
(c) The diminution in value of any personal property that has 
been damaged – as the case may be, if injury or loss or damage 
was directly attributable to carrying out such work or the 
participation in such training.

 (2) Any compensation payable under subsection (1) of this section shall 
be paid by the Crown out of moneys appropriated by the Legislative 
Assembly for the purpose.

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

361

 (3) In the event of any dispute as to the proper compensation payable 
under this section the amount of compensation payable be ﬁxed by the 
High Court.

 (4) For the purposes of this section, travelling directly to and returning 
directly from any place where hurricane safety training is to be or has 
been carried out shall be deemed to be the carrying out of such work or 
the participation in such training as the case may be.

14. 

Protection from liability –
 (1) No action or proceedings shall be brought against the Crown, or 
the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, or any ofﬁcer or servant of them, or 
against any other person whatsoever to recover damages for any damage 
to property occasioned by any person in the exercise or performance in 
good faith of his powers, duties, or obligations under this Act.

15. 

 (2) No person shall be personally liable for any act done or default 
made by him in good faith in the course of carrying out hurricane safety 
work, or participating in hurricane safety training, under the control of 
a person referred to in sections 3 or 4 of this Act.

Requisitioning powers –
 (1) Where a state of warning exists or a state of emergency has been 
declared, and, in the opinion of the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer 
or member of the Police, the action authorised by this subsection is 
immediately and urgently necessary for the preservation of human life, he 
or any person authorised by him may, without any further authority than 
this subsection, require the owner or person for the time being in control of 
any vehicle, horse, boat, apparatus, implement, earth-moving equipment, 
construction equipment, or other equipment of any kind whatsoever 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as requisitioned property) forthwith 
to place that requisitioned property under the control and direction of the 
Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer or member of the 
Police, or person so authorised, as the case may be:

 Provided that where the owner or person for the time being in control 
of that requisitioned property cannot be immediately found the Chief 
Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer or member of the 
Police, or person so authorised may assume forthwith the control and 
direction of the requisitioned property.

 (2) Every person commits an offense against this Act who fails to comply 
with any direction given to him under subsection (1) of this section.

362 Disaster Management

 Provided that no person shall be deemed to have committed an offence 
under this section unless the Court is satisﬁed that the Chief Hurricane 
Safety Ofﬁcer, Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer or member of the Police or 
person so authorised had reasonable grounds for believing that in 
all circumstances of the case the requirement was immediately and 
urgently necessary for the preservation of human life.

 (3) Where under this section any requisitioned property has come 
under the control of a Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, Hurricane Safety 
Ofﬁcer or member of the Police, there shall, on application by the owner, 
be paid to him out of money appropriated by Legislative Assembly such 
amount as the Minister approves by way of reasonable compensation 
for –

(a) The use of that requisitioned property:
(b) Any loss or damage or injury to that requisitioned property 

suffered or incurred while under that control.

16. 

Evacuation of places and buildings –
 (1) Where a state of warning exists or a state of emergency has been 
declared, and, in the opinion of the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer 
or member of the Police, the action authorised by this subsection is 
immediately and urgently necessary for the preservation of human life, 
he or any person authorised by him may, without any further authority 
than this subsection, require the evacuation of any area or building 
or place and the exclusion of any persons and vehicles from any area, 
building, or place.

 (2) Every person commits an offence against this Act who fails to comply 
with any direction given to him under subsection (1) of this section:

 Provided that no person shall be deemed to have committed an offence 
under this section unless the Court is satisﬁed that the Chief Hurricane 
Safety Ofﬁcer, Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer or member of the Police or 
person so authorised had reasonable grounds for believing that in 
all circumstances of the case the requirement was immediately and 
urgently necessary for the preservation of human life.

17. 

 Obstruction or impersonation of ofﬁcers – Every person commits an 
offence who willfully –
(a) Prevents the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, any person acting 
under the authority of the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer, or any 
member of the Police, or any person duly authorised or employed 
for the purpose of carrying out any provision of or under this Act 
or of any such provision; or

 
 
18. 

19. 

Appendix D 

363

(b) Obstructs or impedes any such person in carrying out any such 

provision; or

(c) Not being a person referred to in paragraph (a) of this section, 
for the purpose of committing or facilitating the commission of an 
offence under any enactment, by words, conduct, or demeanour 
pretends that he is such person, or puts on or assumes the dress, 
name, designation, or description of such person.

 Penalty for offences – Every person who commits an offence against this 
Act is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
four hundred dollars.

Regulations –
 (1) The High Commissioner may from time to time, by Order in 
Executive Council, make such regulations with respect to hurricane 
safety as appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose 
of securing the public safety and generally safeguarding the interests of 
the public during any warning or emergency.

 (2) Regulations made under subsection (1) of this section may describe 
penalties for the breach of any such regulation, not exceeding –

(a) In the case of an offence committed willfully by an individual, 
imprisonment for a term of three months or a ﬁne of two 
hundred dollars:

(b) In the case of any other offence committed by an individual, a 

ﬁne of one hundred dollars.

 (3) The High Commissioner may from time to time, by Order in 
Executive Council, make regulations generally providing for such 
matters as are contemplated by or necessary for giving full effect to the 
provisions of this Act or any operative national plan and for the due 
administration of this Act.

 (4) All regulations made under this Act shall be laid before the 
Legislative Assembly within twenty-eight days after the making thereof 
if the Legislative Assembly is then in Session, and, if not, shall be laid 
before the Legislative Assembly within twenty-eight days after the 
commencement of the next ensuing session.

20. Annual Report –

 (1) The Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer shall, no later than the thirty-
ﬁrst day of May in each year furnish to the Minister a report on the 
administration of this Act.

 
 
364 Disaster Management

 (2) A copy of the report shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly 
within twenty-eight days after it has been received by the Minister if 
the Legislative Assembly is in Session, and, if not, shall be laid before 
the Legislative Assembly within twenty-eight days after the date of 
Commencement of the next ensuing session.

This Act is administered by the Chief Hurricane Safety Ofﬁcer.

RAROTONGA, COOK ISLANDS: Printed under the authority of the Cook 
Islands Government, by T. KAPI, Government Printer 1973.

-----oOo-----

INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Appendix D 

365

CHAPTER NO. 403

Disaster Management Act

__________

ARRANGEMENTS OF SECTIONS

PART I – PRELIMINARY

1. 
2. 

Purpose of the Act.
Interpretation –
“disaster”
“the National Disaster Centre”
“the National Disaster Committee”
“province”
“Provincial Disaster Committee”
“this Act”

PART II – DISASTER MANAGEMENT

Division 1 – National Disaster Committee

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

National Disaster Committee.
Co-opted members of National Disaster Committee.
Meetings of the National Disaster Committee.
Functions of the National Disaster Committee.
Powers of the National Disaster Committee.
Reports.

Division 2 – Provincial Disaster Committee

Provincial Disaster Committees.

9. 
10. Co-opted members of Provincial Disaster Committees.
11. Meetings of a Provincial Disaster Committee.
Functions of a Provincial Disaster Committee.
12. 
13. 
Powers of a Provincial Disaster Committee.
14. Reports.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
366 Disaster Management

PART III – NATIONAL DISASTER CENTRE

15. National Disaster Centre.
16. Director of the National Disaster Centre.
17. 
18. Other Staff.

Functions of the Director.

PART IV – FINANCIAL AND OTHER ASSISTANCE

19. Request for assistance.
20. Granting of request for assistance.
21. 

Funding for disaster relief costs.

PART V – MISCELLANEOUS

22. Regulations.
23. Repeal.

____________________

INDEPENDENT STATE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA

CHAPTER NO. 403

Disaster Management Act

Being an Act to make provision with respect to emergencies arising out of 
epidemic, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and other disasters, and for 
related purposes.

PART I – PRELIMINARY

1. 

Purpose of the Act.

The purpose of this Act is to establish a machinery for forward 
planning to ensure the efﬁcient, prompt and effective management and control 
of natural disasters in the country.

2. 

Interpretation.
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears –

 “disaster” means an earthquake, volcanic eruption, storm, tempest, 

 
 
Appendix D 

367

ﬂood, ﬁre or outbreak of pestilence or infectious disease, or any 
other natural calamity whether similar to any such occurrence 
or not, on such an extensive scale as to be likely to endanger the 
public safety or to deprive the community of supplies or services 
essential to life;

“the National Disaster Centre” means the National Disaster Centre 

established by Section 15;

“the National Disaster Committee” means the Committee established 

by Section 3;

“province” includes the National Capital District;
“Provincial Disaster Committee” means the Committee established 

by Section 9;

“this Act” includes the regulations.

PART II – DISASTER COMMITTEE

Division 1 – National Disaster Committee.

3. 

National Disaster Committee.
(1) The National Disaster Committee is hereby established.

(2) The National Disaster Committee shall consist of –

(a) the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister; and
(b) the Commander of the Defence Force; and
(c) the Commissioner of Police; and
(d) the Head of the Department responsible for ﬁnancial matters; 

and

(e) The Head of the Department responsible for defence matters; 

and

(f) the Head of the Department responsible for works and supply 

matters; and

(g) the Head of the Department responsible for health matters; and
(h) where matters concerning international assistance are under 
consideration, the Head of the Department responsible for 
foreign affairs and trade matters.

 (3) The Prime Minister shall appoint one of the members of the 
National Disaster Committee to be the Chairman and another to be the 
Deputy Chairman.

4. 

Co-opted members of National Disaster Committee.
 (1) The National Disaster Committee may, in relation to a matter before 
it or to a particular disaster, co-opt –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
368 Disaster Management

(a) any Department Head or ofﬁcer; or
(b) any other person,

as a member of the National Disaster Committee.

 (2) A member co-opted under Subsection (1) may take part in 
deliberations and vote on questions relating to the matter or to the 
particular disaster in relation to which he was appointed.

 (3) For the purposes of this Act, other than as provided by this section, 
a member co-opted under Subsection (1) shall not be regarded as a 
member of the National Disaster Committee.

5. Meetings of the National Disaster Committee.

 (1) The National Disaster Committee may meet and transact business 
at such times and in such places as determined by the Chairman, and 
in any case shall meet at least twice in a calendar year.

 (2) Where he receives a request to do so by a member of the National 
Disaster Committee, the Chairman shall convene a meeting within 
three days.

(3) At a meeting of the National Disaster Committee –

(a) a quorum is three members; and
(b) the Chairman shall preside at all meetings at which he is 

present; and

(c) in the absence of the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman shall 
preside and where both the Chairman and Deputy Chairman 
are absent, the members present shall elect one of their number 
to act as Chairman for the purposes of that meeting; and
(d) matters arising shall be determined by a majority of votes of 

members present and voting; and

(e) the person presiding has a deliberate and, in the event of an 

equality of votes on a matter, also a casting vote.

 (4) The National Disaster Committee shall cause full minutes of its 
meetings to be kept in such a manner as determined by it.

 (5) Except where a speciﬁc disaster is being considered, a member of 
the National Disaster Committee may be represented at a meeting of 
that Committee by a delegate appointed in writing by the member and 
a delegate shall have the full powers of the member for whom he is 
delegate.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

369

 (6) Subject to this section, the procedures at a meeting of the National 
Disaster Committee are as determined by it.

6. 

Functions of the National Disaster Committee.
The functions of the National Disaster Committee are –

(a) to supervise the national state of preparedness for emergencies 
and to report on it to the National Executive Council; and
(b) to maintain the National Emergency Plan of the National 

Executive Council; and

(c) to assign responsibilities for disaster-related activities to 

Department and other bodies; and

(d) to co-ordinate Departmental relief actions and collate national 

relief requirements; and

(e) to advise the National Executive Council if appeal for 

international assistance is required; and

(f) to lay down guidelines for the preparation and format of 

provincial disaster plans; and

(g) to examine and where necessary approve all grants from 

national funds for emergency relief; and

(h) to foster public awareness of the effects of natural phenomena and 
measures which can be taken to prevent or mitigate them; and
(i) 
 to supervise the establishment of stock-piles of relief supplies; and
(j) in the case of a disaster, to advise the National Executive Council 
of all the circumstances and on the advisability of declaring a 
National Emergency under the Constitution.

7. 

Powers of the National Disaster Committee.
The National Disaster Committee has power to do all things necessary 
or convenient to be done for or in connection with the performance of its 
functions under this Act.

8. 

Reports.
 (1) The National Disaster Committee shall, as soon as possible after 31 
December in each year, prepare and give to the Minister for presentation 
to the National Parliament, a report on the activities of the Committee 
for the year ending 31 December.

 (2) Subsection (1) does not prevent the National Disaster Committee 
from making, on its own initiative, or at the request of the Minister, 
other reports on the work of the National Disaster Committee.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
370 Disaster Management

Division 2 – Provincial Disaster Committees

9. 

Provincial Disaster Committee
 (1) A Provincial Disaster Committee is hereby established for each 
province.

(2) A Provincial Disaster Committee shall consist of –

(a) the head of the Department of the Province or, in the case of the 
National Capital District, the Manager of the National Capital 
District Interim Commission, who is the Chairman; and

(b) the Provincial Police Commander or, in the case of the 
National Capital District, the National Capital District Police 
Commander; and

(c) the Provincial Manager (Works and Supply) or, in the case of 
the National Capital District, the National Capital District City 
Engineer; and

(d) the Provincial Health Ofﬁcer or, in the case of the National 
Capital District, the National Capital District Health Ofﬁcer; 
and

(e) the ofﬁcer-in-charge of the Provincial Affairs Branch of the 
Department of the Province or, in the case of the National 
Capital District, a person appointed by the Manager of the 
National Capital District Interim Commission.

10. Co-opted members of the Provincial Disaster Committees.

 (1) A Provincial Disaster Committee may, in relation to a matter before 
it, or to a particular disaster, co-opt –

(a) an ofﬁcer; or
(b) a member of a mission or voluntary organization; or
(c) any person,

as a member of the Provincial Disaster Committee.

 (2) A member co-opted under Subsection (1) may take part in 
deliberations and vote on questions relating to the matter or to the 
particular disaster in relation to which he was appointed.

 (3) For the purposes of this Act, other than as provided in this section, 
a member co-opted under Subsection (1) shall not be regarded as a 
member of a Provincial Disaster Committee.

11. Meetings of a Provincial Disaster Committee.

 (1) A Provincial Disaster Committee may meet and transact business at 
such times and in such places as determined by the Chairman.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

371

(2) At a meeting of a Provincial Disaster Committee –

(a) a quorum if three members; and
(b) the Chairman shall preside at all meetings at which he is 
present, and, in the absence of the Chairman, members present 
shall elect one of their number to preside; and

(c) matters arising shall be decided by a majority of votes of 

members present and voting; and

(d) the person presiding has a deliberative and, in the event of an 

equality of votes on a matter, also a casting vote.

 (3) A Provincial Disaster Committee shall cause full minutes of its 
meetings to be kept in such a manner as determined by it.

 (4) Subject to this section, the procedures at a meeting of a Provincial 
Disaster Committee shall be as determined by it.

12. Functions of a Provincial Disaster Committee.

The functions of a Provincial Disaster Committee are –

(a) to assess particular hazards facing the province; and
(b) to liaise and co-operate with the Provincial Executive Council 
in ensuring that development plans for the province take into 
account hazards facing it; and

(c) to prepare emergency plans for the province in accordance 
with guidelines laid down by the National Disaster Committee, 
and supervise the state of preparedness for emergencies in the 
province; and

(d) to co-ordinate stock piling of relief supplies and relief 

operations; and

(e) to receive all applications for relief assistance; and
(f) to foster public awareness of the effects of natural phenomena 
and the measures which can be taken to prevent or mitigate 
them; and

(g) to organise the training of relief workers and to practise the 

provincial emergency plans.

13. Powers of a Provincial Disaster Committee.

The Provincial Disaster Committee has powers to do all things necessary 
or convenient to be done for or in connection with the performance of its 
functions under this Act.

14. Reports.

 (1) The Provincial Disaster Committee shall, as soon as possible after 
31 December in each year, prepare and give to –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
372 Disaster Management

(a) the Premier, for presentation to the Provincial Assembly; and
 (b) the Minister, for presentation to the Parliament, a report on the 

activities of the Committee for the year ending 31 December.

(2) A report under Subsection (1) shall include details of –

(a) emergency and other plans; and
(b) actions taken to implement the requirements of preparedness 

dealt within the plans referred to in paragraph (a); and

(c) all aid requests to, and grants from, the National Disaster 

Committee.

 (3) Where necessary, the Provincial Disaster Committee shall furnish a 
report for the purposes of Section 19(2), and such report shall include 
a minority report (if any).

 (4) This section does not prevent a Provincial Disaster Committee from 
making, on its own initiative, or at the request of the Minister, other 
reports on its activities.

PART III – NATIONAL DISASTER CENTRE

15. National Disaster Centre.

(1) The National Disaster Centre is hereby established.

 (2) The National Disaster Centre shall, in addition to such functions 
and duties as are provided under any other Act, co-ordinate all disaster 
situations and surveillance matters.

16. Director of the National Disaster Centre.

 (1) There shall be a Director of the National Disaster Centre who shall 
be –

(a) an ofﬁcer of a State Service; and
(b) appointed by the Minister, after consultation with the National 

Disaster Committee; and

(c) appointed for a term of not less than two years.

 (2) The Director of the National Disaster Centre shall be the Executive 
Ofﬁcer of the National Disaster Committee.

17. Functions of the Director.

The functions of the Director of the National Disaster Centre are –

(a) to manage the National Disaster Centre; and
(b) to provide assistance to the Provincial Disaster Committees; and

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

373

(c) such other functions and duties as are, from time to time, 

directed by the National Disaster Committee.

18. Other staff.

Any staff required for the purposes of the National Disaster Centre shall 

be members of the Defense Force.

PART IV – FINANCIAL AND OTHER ASSISTANCE

19. Request for assistance.

 (1) A Provincial Disaster Committee may request the National Disaster 
Committee for ﬁnancial and other assistance.

 (2) A request under Subsection (1) shall be accompanied by a report of 
the extent of the funding required.

 (3) Subject to Subsection (4), the National Disaster Committee may, on 
receipt of a request and the report referred to in Subsections (1) and (2), 
direct the Director of the National Disaster Centre to investigate the 
request for assistance and to report to it.

 (4) The requirement under Subsection (3) may be waived or varied 
where the National Disaster Committee considers the request to be a 
matter of urgency.

20. Granting request for assistance.

 (1) Subject to Subsection (2), funding of disaster relief operations shall 
be in accordance with the following: –

(a) the ﬁrst K15,000.00 shall be borne by the Provincial 

Government concerned; and

(b) any excess over K15,000.00 and up to K100,000.00 shall 
be borne equally between the National Government and the 
Provincial Government concerned; and

(c) any excess over K100,000.00 shall be borne by the National 

Government.

 (2) All amounts granted by the National Government for the purpose 
of Subsection (l)(b) and (c) shall be subject to such conditions as are 
imposed by the National Government.

 
 
 
 
374 Disaster Management

PART V – MISCELLANEOUS

22. Regulations.

The Head of State, acting on advice, may make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act, prescribing all matters that by this Act are required 
or permitted to be prescribed or are necessary or convenient to be prescribed 
for carrying out or giving effect to this Act.

23. Repeal.

The Emergency Provisions Act is repealed.

-----oOo-----

Appendix D 

375

QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA

____________

STATE COUNTER-DISASTER ORGANIZATION ACT 1975-1978

[Reprinted as of 1 May 1981]

____________

State Counter-Disaster Organization Act 1975, No. 40

As amended by

State Counter-Disaster Organization Act Amendment Act 1978, No. 60

____________

An Act to provide for the establishment of a State Counter-Disaster Organization 
and a State Emergency Service and their powers, authorities, functions 
and duties and for matters incidental to and consequent upon their 
establishment

[Assented to 1 October 1975]

BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament 
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows: –

PART I – PRELIMINARY

Short title. This Act may be cited as the State Counter-Disaster 

1. 
Organization Act 1975.
Collective title conferred by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 1 (3).

Commencement. This act shall commence on a date appointed by 

2. 
Proclamation.
Commenced 11 December 1975 (Proc. pubd. Gaz. 11 December 1975, p. 1387).

376 Disaster Management

3. 

Arrangement. This Act is divided into. Parts as follows: –
PART I – PRELIMINARY (ss. 1-7);
PART II – ADMINISTRATION (ss. 8-22);
PART III – DECLARATION OF STATE DISASTER (ss. 23-25);
PART IV – 

 POWERS AND DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES 
(ss. 26-28);

PART V – MISCELLANEOUS (ss. 29-38).

4. 

Repeal and savings.
 (1) The Civil Defense Acts, 1939-1942 (in this Act referred to as the 
“repealed Acts”) are repealed.

 (2) A body by whatever name called established pursuant to the 
repealed Acts by a Local Authority or Combined Local Authorities and 
in existence at the commencement of this Act is continued in existence 
and shall be deemed to be established under this Act.

 (3) Where a provision of this Act is inconsistent with a provision of 
any other Act, the provision of this Act shall prevail.

Limitation of Operation. This Act does not authorize the taking of 

5. 
measures amounting to or making preparations for –

(a) actual combat against an enemy;
(b) the putting down of a riot or other civil disturbance;
(c) the bringing to an end of a strike or lock-out.

6. 

Interpretation. In this Act, save where the contrary intention appears –
“authorized person” means a person authorized to act by the chairman 

or by a disaster district co-ordinator;

“body” means a body corporate or unincorporate and includes a 
government department, instrumentality or agency, public or Local 
Authority;

“Chairman” means the Chairman of the Central Control Group 

established under this Act;

“Combined Local Authorities” means the Local Authorities that have 

united with one another for counter-disaster purpose;

“counter-disaster” means the planning, organizing, co-ordination 
or implementation of measures that are necessary or desirable 
to prevent, minimize or overcome the effects of a disaster upon 
members of the public or any property in the State and includes the 
conduct of or participation in training for those purposes; the term 
includes also civil defence measures necessary to combat the effects 
of enemy attack or hostilities;

 
 
 
Appendix D 

377

“Director” means the Director of the State Emergency Service constituted 
under this Act and includes the person for the time being carrying 
out the duties of the Director;

“disaster” means –

(a) a ﬂood, earthquake, seismic sea wave, cyclone, storm, tornado, 

eruption or other natural happening;

(b) any explosion, ﬁre, oil spill or accident of any kind;
(c) any infestation, plague or epidemic;
(d) an attack directed against the State whether or not made by 
an enemy and whether by bombs or missiles or by atomic, 
chemical or any means, that causes or threatens to cause loss of 
life property or injury to persons or property distress to persons 
or that in any way endangers the safety of the public in the State 
or any part thereof;

“disaster district” means a portion of the State declared to be a disaster 

district under this Act;

“disaster district co-ordinator” means a disaster district co-ordinator 

appointed under this Act;

“Local Authority” means a Local Authority within the meaning of the 
Local Government Act 1936-1975 and with respect to the City of 
Brisbane means Brisbane City Council constituted by the City of 
Brisbane Act 1924-1974;

“local controller” means the controller of a local emergency service 

appointed under this Act;

“local emergency service” means an emergency service established 
and maintained under this Act by a Local Authority within their 
combined Areas;

“Minister” means the Minister for Police or other Minister of the Crown 
who, at the material time, is charged with the administration of this 
Act and includes any Minister of the Crown who is temporarily 
performing the duties of the Minister;

“Organization” means 

the State Counter-Disaster Organization 

constituted under this Act;

“region” means any part of a disaster district or any disaster district or 
any two or more disaster districts declared to be a region under this 
Act;

“regional operations ofﬁcer” means a regional operations ofﬁcer 

appointed under this Act;

“resources” includes food, manpower, any horse or other animal, 
vehicle, vessel, aircraft, plant, apparatus, implement, earth-moving 
equipment, construction equipment of any kind or any means of 
supplying a want or need;

 
 
 
 
378 Disaster Management

“statutory service” mean a body that is constituted by or under an Act of 
the State or of the Commonwealth and whose role usually includes 
 counter-disaster operations;

“vehicle” means a vehicle within the meaning of the Trafﬁc Act 1949- 

1977;

“vessel” includes ship, boat, punt, ferry or air cushion vehicle however 

propelled.
As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 2.

7. 

Crown bound. This Act binds the Crown.

PART II – ADMINISTRATION

8. 
Administration of Act. This Act shall be administered by the Minister 
and subject to his control and direction by the Director and other ofﬁcers 
appointed pursuant to this Act.

9. 

State Counter-Disaster Organization.
 (1) There is established and there shall at all times hereafter be 
constituted a body called the “State Counter-Disaster Organization”.

(2) The Organization shall consist of –

(a) the holders for the time being of the following ofﬁces of the 

State –

(i) the Co-ordinator-General;
(ii) the Director-General of Health;
(iii) the Under Treasurer;
(iv) the Undersecretary, Premier’s department;
(v) the Commissioner of Police; 
(vi) the Director of Harbours and Marine;
(vii) the Director, State Emergency Service;

(b) such other persons are appointed by the Governor in Council 

by Order in Council.

Persons appointed pursuant to subparagraph (b) shall hold ofﬁce during the 
pleasure of the Governor in Council.

10. Functions of Organization. The function of the Organization are –

(a) to co-ordinate the resources necessary to ensure that all steps are 

taken to plan for and counter the effects of a disaster;

(b) to give advice and assistance to the Minister on all matters with 

respect to counter-disaster.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

379

11. Business of Organization. The organization shall meet as often as 
necessary for the administration of this Act and the performance of its functions 
at such times and places as it thinks ﬁt and shall conduct its business in the 
manner prescribed or, so far as not prescribed, as it determines from time to 
time.

12. Central Control Group.

 (1) For the purposes of carrying out the functions of the Organization 
there is established and there shall at all times hereafter be constituted a 
Central Control Group consisting of those members of the Organization 
who are holders for the time being of those ofﬁces of the State speciﬁed 
in Section 9 (2) (a). The Co-ordinator-General shall be the Chairman 
of the Group and the Director, State Emergency Service shall be the 
executive ofﬁcer.

 (2) The Minister may, in consultation with the Minister in charge of any 
department of the Government of the State or statutory corporation, 
appoint as a member of the Central Control Group for such period 
as the Minister thinks ﬁt the permanent head of that department or 
statutory corporation, whether or not that permanent head is a member 
of the Organization.

 (3) The Chairman shall preside at all meetings or consultations among 
members of the Central Control Group at which he is present and 
in his absence from any cause another member thereof appointed as 
prescribed shall preside and while so presiding shall have the powers, 
authorities, functions, duties and immunities of the Chairman.

 (4) If any member is unable from any cause to attend a meeting or 
consultation among members of the Central Control Group, he may 
authorize any other ofﬁcer of his department to attend the meeting 
or participate in the consultation in his stead and while so attending 
or participating that other ofﬁcer shall be deemed for all purposes to 
be a member of the Central Control Group save that he shall not be 
entitled to be chairman of that meeting or for the purposes of that 
consultation.

 (5) The Central Control Group shall meet as often as necessary for the 
due performance of its functions at such times and places as it thinks ﬁt 
and shall conduct its business in the manner prescribed or so far as not 
prescribed, as it determines from time to time.

380 Disaster Management

13. 

State Emergency Service.
 (1) The body called the “Queensland State Emergency Service” 
established pursuant to the repealed Acts is continued in existence and 
established under this Act under the name “State Emergency Service”.

 (2) The persons who at the commencement of this Act comprised the 
body called the Queensland State Emergency Service shall, subject to this 
Act, comprise the State Emergency Service as established by this Act.

 (3) The Governor in Council may appoint a Director of the State 
Emergency Service and such other ofﬁcers as he considers necessary 
for the effectual administration of the State Emergency Service.

 An ofﬁcer appointed pursuant to this subsection shall hold ofﬁce 

under, subject to and in accordance with Public Service Act 1922-1973.

 (4) Unless and until another appointment is made, the person who 
at the commencement of this Act is the Director of the body called 
the Queensland State Emergency Service shall be the Director and any 
other person holding an ofﬁce or occupying a position in that body 
at the commencement of this Act shall continue to hold that ofﬁce or 
occupy that position until he vacates or is lawfully removed from that 
ofﬁce or position.

14. Functions of State Emergency Service. The functions of the State 
Emergency Service are –

 (a) to advise and assist Local Authorities, Government Departments, 

statutory organizations, voluntary groups and other bodies;

(b) to educate and train members of the public (including volunteers 

and members of voluntary groups);

(c) to co-ordinate, direct and control members of the public (including 
volunteers and members of voluntary groups), materials and 
resources,

with respect to counter-disaster purposes.
Substituted by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 3.

15. Powers and duties of Director generally. In carrying out the functions 
of the State Emergency Service, the Director –

(a) shall establish and direct the policy of the State Emergency Service 
with respect to planning, organization, equipment, training, 
administration and operations;

(b) shall arrange counter-disaster education and advisory programmes 

and disseminate information;

Appendix D 

381

(c) may appoint suitable persons to be registered volunteer 

members of the State Emergency Service;

(d) may appoint suitable persons to be executive volunteer members 

(other than controllers) of the State Emergency Service;

(e) prior to, during or subsequent to occurrence of a disaster, may 
appoint suitable persons to be temporary volunteer members 
of the State Emergency Service;

(f) may issue to members or volunteer members of any class or 

kind adequate means of personal identiﬁcation;

(g) may inspect at regular intervals of time resources provided for 

Local Authorities for counter-disaster purposes;

(h) shall advise and assist the Minister and the Chairman on all 

matters with respect to the State Emergency Service.

As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 4.

16. Powers and duties of Director as executive ofﬁcer. In his capacity as 
executive ofﬁcer of the Central Control Group, the Director –

(a) shall assist and advise the Minister and the Chairman on all 

matters with respect to counter-disaster;

(b) shall be responsible to the Chairman for the co-ordination and 

adequacy of counter-disaster measures;

(c) shall, prior to, during or subsequent to the occurrence of a 
disaster translate to action instructions the decisions of the 
Central Control Group and shall ensure that those instructions 
are transmitted to and carried out by the bodies to whom they 
are directed.

17. Committees. The Minister may appoint such executive committees 
and advisory committees as he considers necessary to assist the Organization 
of the State Emergency Service in the efﬁcient performance of its functions or 
in the achievement of its objects and purposes.

A committee shall comprise prescribed persons.

18. Declaration of regions. The Governor in Council may, by Order in 
Council –

(a) divide a disaster district into two or more parts and declare 

each part to be a region for the purposes of this Act;

(b) declare a disaster district or any two or more disaster districts 

to be a region for the purposes of this Act;

(c) vary any region declared pursuant to paragraph (b) by excluding 

therefrom or including therein any disaster district.

Substituted by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 5.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
382 Disaster Management

19. Appointment of regional operations ofﬁcer.

 (1) The Governor in Council may by Order in Council appoint in 
respect of each region a regional operations ofﬁcer.

 (2) A regional operations ofﬁcer shall have and may exercise such 
powers and perform functions and duties as per prescribed or so as far 
as not prescribed as the Director determines.

20. Disaster districts.

 (1) The Governor in Council may by Order in Council constitute any 
portion of the State a disaster district for the purposes of this Act and 
assign to that district a name and may in like manner –

(a) include in a disaster district any portion of the State that is not 

included in a disaster district;

(b) abolish a disaster district or districts and join such district or 
districts or join parts of such districts with another district or 
districts;

(c) alter the boundaries of disaster districts by including in one 
district any part or parts of other districts and by excluding 
such part or parts from such other district or districts;
(d) divide a disaster district into two or more disaster districts;
(e) alter the name of a disaster district.

 (2) A disaster district constituted pursuant to this section may comprise 
the whole or any division or part of the Area of a Local Authority or 
the whole or any divisions or parts of the Areas of two or more Local 
Authorities.

21. Disaster district control groups.

 (1) There is established and there shall at all times hereafter be 
constituted in respect of each disaster district a disaster district control 
group comprising a disaster district co-ordinator appointed by the 
Governor in Council by Order in Council who shall be chairman and 
such other members as are prescribed, appointed as prescribed.

(2) The functions of a disaster district control group are –

(a) to make counter-disaster plans for its disaster district and 
review them from time to time and submit plans and reviewed 
plans to the Central Control Group;

(b) to keep and maintain up to date standing orders for counter-

disaster purposes within its disaster district;

(c) such other functions as are prescribed.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

383

 (3) A disaster district control group shall meet as often as is necessary 
for the due performance of its functions at such times and places as it 
thinks ﬁt and shall conduct its business in the manner prescribed or, so 
far as not prescribed, as it determines from time to time.

 (4) A disaster district co-ordinator shall have and may exercise such 
powers and perform such functions and duties as are prescribed or so 
far as not prescribed as the Minister determines.
As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 6

22. Power to delegate.

 (1) The Minister, Chairman or Director may either generally or otherwise 
as provided by the instrument of delegation, by writing signed by him, 
delegate to any person all or any of his powers, authorities, functions 
and duties under this Act except this power of delegation.

 (2) A power, authority, function or duty so delegated, if exercised or 
performed by the delegate; shall be exercised or performed in accordance 
with the instrument of delegation.

 (3) A delegation may be made subject to such terms or limitations as 
the Minister, Chairman or Director thinks ﬁt including a requirement 
that the delegate shall report to him upon the exercise or performance 
of the delegated power, authority, function or duty.

 (4) The Minister, Chairman or Director may make such and so many 
delegations of the same power, authority, function or duty and to such 
number of persons as he considers necessary or desirable.

 (5) A delegation is revocable at the will of the Minister, Chairman or 
Director and does not prevent the exercise of a power or authority or 
the performance of a function or duty by him.

PART III – DECLARATION OF STATE OF DISASTER

23. 

Power of disaster district co-ordinator to declare state of disaster.
 (1) If at any time it appears to a disaster district co-ordinator that the 
magnitude or threatened magnitude of a disaster or impending disaster 
is or is likely to be so great in extent or severity in his disaster district 
that the counter-disaster measures necessary or desirable in respect of 
the disaster are or are likely to be beyond the capacity of the statutory 
services, he may, after consultation with the disaster district control 
group for that district and with the approval of the Minister, declare 
that a state of disaster exists in respect of that district.

 
384 Disaster Management

(2) A declaration of a state of disaster made pursuant to this section –

(a) shall be in the prescribed form;
(b) shall come in force immediately after it is signed;
(c) shall continue in force for three days from and including the 
date the declaration was made unless sooner revoked by Order 
in Council.

 (3) The duration of a state of disaster declared in a declaration made 
pursuant to this section may be extended by Order in Council for such 
periods not exceeding in each case 14 days as the Governor in Council 
thinks ﬁt.
As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 7.

24. Power of Governor in Council to declare state of disaster.

 (1) If at any time it is made to appear to the Governor in Council that 
the magnitude or threatened magnitude of a disaster or impending 
disaster is or is likely to be so great in extent or severity that the counter-
disaster measures necessary or desirable with respect to the disaster are 
beyond the resources of a disaster district co-ordinator, he may, upon the 
recommendation of the Minister, by Order in Council, declare that a state 
of disaster exists in respect of any district or districts or of the whole State.

(2) (a) A declaration of a state of disaster made pursuant to this section-
(i) shall come into force immediately the Order in Council in 

respect thereof is made;

(ii) shall continue in force for 14 days from the date the Order 
in Council in respect was made unless sooner revoked.

(b) the duration of a state of disaster declared in a declaration 
pursuant to this section may be extended by Order in Council 
for such periods not exceeding in each case 14 days as the 
Governor in Council thinks ﬁt.

(3) The Governor in Council by Order in Council –

(a) may at any time revoke a declaration made pursuant to this 

section or section 23;

(b) may extend for periods not exceeding in each case 14 days the 
duration of a state of disaster declared in a declaration pursuant 
to this section or section 23.

As amended by Act of 1978, no. 60, s. 8.

25. Powers upon declaration of state of disaster.

 (1) Upon a declaration of a state of disaster pursuant to section 23 or 
24 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

385

(a) the Chairman –

(i) shall institute such measures as are in accordance with the 
disaster contingency plans, directions and orders of the 
Central Control Group;

(ii) may direct the resources of the Government of the State 
and other resources that he considers necessary to relieve 
the effect of the disaster be made available;

(iii) may take such other actions as he considers appropriate to 

counter the effects of the disaster;

(iv) may authorize the expenditure of such sums of money as 
are determined by the Government of the State to relieve 
personal distress and assist in counter-disaster measures;

(v) may if it appears to him that resources of the Commonwealth 
or of another State or Territory of the Commonwealth are 
necessary to make better provision for the relief of the effects 
of the disaster, with the approval of the Minister, request 
aid in accordance with the prescribed procedures.

(b) a disaster district co-ordinator –

(i) shall take immediate action to use, direct and co-ordinate 
all available resources within his disaster district to counter 
the effects of the disaster;

(ii) shall, immediately when they become available, use, 
direct and co-ordinate all additional resources that may be 
allocated or in respect of which arrangements have been 
made for allocation by the Central Control Group;
(iii) shall take such other measures as are provided for in 

contingency plans and standing orders.

 (2) Upon a declaration of a state of disaster pursuant to section 23 or 
24 –

(a) the Chairman or a disaster district co-ordinator, if he is of opinion 
that such action is necessary for the preservation of human life 
and without any other authority other than this provision –
(i) may require the owner or the person for the time being in 
charge of any resources to surrender them and place them 
under the control and direction of any authorized person 
involved in counter-disaster operations;

(ii) may direct the evacuation and exclusion of persons from 
any place and in the exercise of those powers may remove 
or cause to be removed a person who does not comply 
with a direction to evacuate or a person who enters or is 
found in a place in respect of which a direction for the 
exclusion of persons has been given;

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
386 Disaster Management

(b) a disaster district co-ordinator, local controller, police ofﬁcer or 
an authorized person involved in counter-disaster operations 
without any authority other than this provision-
 (i) may enter (by force if necessary) any place where he 
believes on reasonable grounds it is necessary so to do 
for the saving of human life or the prevention of injury to 
persons or for the rescue of injured or endangered persons 
or for facilitating the carrying out of other urgent measures 
with respect to the relief of suffering and distress;

 (ii) may, if in his opinion it is necessary to do so for the 
conduct of counter-disaster operations, close to trafﬁc any 
road, street, motorway, private street, private way, service 
lane, right of way or access way or other way or close any 
public place;

(iii) may remove from any place a vehicle or vessel that is 
impending counter-disaster operations and to facilitate its 
removal may use such force as is reasonably necessary or 
break into that vehicle or vessel.

 (3) The powers conferred upon the Chairman or a disaster district 
coordinator by subsection (2) (a) (ii) may be exercised also by a local 
controller, police ofﬁcer or an authorized person involved in counter-
disaster operations.

 (4) A person who suffers loss or damage to his property by reason 
of the exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (2) (a) (I) and 
subsection (2) (b) (iii) shall be entitled to claim in the manner prescribed 
compensation for such loss or damage.

 A claim for compensation shall be made to the Minister whose decision 
thereon shall be ﬁnal and conclusive.
As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 9.

PART IV – POWERS AND DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES

26. Duties as to counter-disaster measures.

 (1) Save where the Local Authority has united with one or more than 
one other Local Authority for counter-disaster under subsection (2), 
each Local Authority –

(a) shall prepare a local counter-disaster plan to deal with all 

counter-disaster measures within its Area;

(b) shall establish and at all times maintain within its Area a local 
emergency service based upon the resources of the Local 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

387

Authority and including members of the State Emergency 
Service, volunteers and members of voluntary groups all 
of whom shall be resident in that Area, with such advisory 
committees, units and services as the Minister considers 
necessary or desirable;

(c) shall use, as prescribed or so far as not prescribed as the Minister 
determines, for counter-disaster purposes its resources and 
resources made available to it for those purposes.

 (2) A Local Authority may, by agreement and with the approval of the 
Minister, unite with one or more than one other Local Authority for the 
purpose of arranging and carrying out counter-disaster measures in the 
combined Areas of the Local Authorities that are parties to the agreement.

 (3) Where two or more Local Authorities have united for counter-
disaster purposes under this section they –

(a) shall prepare a join counter-disaster plan to deal with all 

counter-disaster measures within the combined Areas;

(b) shall establish and at all times maintain within their combined 
Areas a local emergency service based upon the resources of 
the Combined Local Authorities and including members of the 
State Emergency Service, volunteers and members of voluntary 
groups all of whom shall be resident within those Areas, with 
such committees, units and services as the Minister considers 
necessary or desirable;

(c) shall use, as prescribed or so far as not prescribed as the Minister 
determines, for counter-disaster purposes the resources of the 
combined Local Authorities and resources made available to 
them for those purposes.

 (4) Every counter-disaster plan prepared in accordance with this 
section shall be furnished by the Local Authority or, as the case 
requires, Combined Local Authorities to the appropriate disaster 
district coordinator for approval and shall upon approval form part of 
the disaster district plans of the Organization.

 The procedure to be followed by a disaster district co-ordinator 
upon receipt by him of a plan furnished pursuant to this section shall 
be as prescribed.

 (5) Upon the establishment of a local emergency service pursuant to 
this section, a Local Authority or, as the case requires, the Combined 
Local Authorities shall nominate a person to be the local controller and 
furnish that nomination to the Minister for approval and appointment, 
in accordance with the prescribed procedure.

 
 
 
 
388 Disaster Management

 A local controller shall have and may exercise such powers and 
perform such functions and duties as are prescribed or so far as not 
prescribed as the Minister determines.
As amended by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 10.

27. Power to unite in contracts for counter-disaster purposes. Where 
two or more Local Authorities have united for counter-disaster purposes, they 
may for those purposes enter into contracts (being within their several powers) 
between themselves or some or one of them on behalf of all of them on the one 
hand generally may join in any act.

28. Allocation to Local Authorities.

 (1) the Minister may, out of moneys appropriated by Parliament for the 
purposes of this Act, allocate to a Local Authority or Combined Local 
Authorities such sums and for such purposes as he determines.

 (2) Sums allocated pursuant to this section shall be expended for the 
purposes for which the allocation was made.

PART V – MISCELLANEOUS

29. Protection from liability. No action or proceeding shall lie or be brought 
or allowed by or in favor of any person against the Crown, the Minister, a 
Local Authority, Combined Local Authorities, members of the Police Force, 
the State Emergency Service of the Director or other ofﬁcer thereof or any 
other person or body acting in the execution or intended execution of this Act 
or in accordance with any delegation under this Act or in compliance with any 
direction or purported to be given under this Act in respect of anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith under and for the purposes of this Act.

30. Offences with respect to ofﬁcers and other persons. A person shall 
not assault, obstruct, threaten, abuse, insult or intimidate the Director, an 
ofﬁce or any other person in the exercise of his powers or the discharge of his 
functions and duties under this Act or attempt so to do.

31. Offences generally and penalty.

 (1) A person who contravenes or fails to comply with any provision of 
this Act is guilty of an offence against this Act.

(2) A person who –

(a) fails to do that which is directed or required to do;

 
Appendix D 

389

(b) does that which he is forbidden to do,

by a person acting under the authority of this Act commits an offense 
against this Act.

 (3) A person who is guilty of an offence against this Act is liable to a 
penalty of $500.

32. Proceeding of offences. Prosecutions for offences against this Act shall 
be taken by way of summary proceedings under the Justices Act 1886-1975 
upon the complaint of the Director or person authorized in writing in that 
behalf of the Minister.

33. Offences by body corporate.

 (1) Where a body corporate commits an offence against this Act each of 
the following persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: –

(a) the managing director, manager or other governing ofﬁcer, 
by whatever name called and every member of the governing 
body thereof, by whatever name called; and

(b) every person who in Queensland manages or acts or takes 
part in the management, administration or government of the 
business in Queensland of the body corporate.

 (2) This section applies so as not to limit or affect howsoever the 
liability of a body corporate to be proceeded against and punished for 
an offence against this Act committed by it.

34. Evidentiary provisions. In a proceeding for the purposes of this Act a 
certiﬁcate purporting to be signed by the Director and to certify –

(a) that a state of disaster was in existence either in the whole State 
or a part of the State as speciﬁed therein on a day or during a 
period speciﬁed therein;

(b) that a declaration of a state of disaster was in force on a day or 

during a period speciﬁed therein;

(c) that a delegation by the Minister, Chairman or Director to a 
person speciﬁed therein of the exercise or performance of any 
power, authority, function or duty speciﬁed therein was in force 
on a day or during a period speciﬁed therein;

(d) that a delegation by the Minister, Chairman or Director to 
a person speciﬁed therein was subject to the conditions or 
limitations speciﬁed therein or was not subject to any conditions 
or limitations at all; or

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
390 Disaster Management

(e) that a person speciﬁed therein was a person authorized 

pursuant to this Act,

 shall be evidence and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, 
conclusive evidence of the facts so certiﬁed.

34A. Annual Report. The Director shall, as soon as practicable after the 
thirtieth day of June in each year, submit to the Minister a report on the 
administration and operations of the State of Emergency Service for the period 
of twelve months immediately prior to that date.

The Minister shall lay a copy of every such report before the Legislative 

Assembly.
Inserted by Act of 1978, No. 60, s. 11

35. Protection of employment rights. A person who during the period of a 
state of disaster declared pursuant to this Act is absent from usual employment 
on duties in connection with counter-disaster in any capacity whatever shall 
not be liable for dismissal, loss of long service leave, sick leave, recreation 
leave or other beneﬁts to which he may be entitled under the industrial award 
applicable to his usual employment by reason only of his absence on those 
duties whether or not his usual employer has consented to his absence.

36. Compensation for personal injury. Every person who is a member 
of a local emergency service or any body acting under the authority of the 
Organization or the State Emergency Service shall, while he is engaged in 
counter-disaster operations or participating in counter-disaster training under 
the control of –

(a) a member of the Organization or a person acting under his 

authority;

(b) the Director or a person acting under his authority;
(c) a member of a local emergency service or a person acting under 

his authority,

be deemed to be a worker within the meaning of the Worker’s Compensation Act
1916-1974 and the provision of that Act shall apply accordingly.

37. Orders in Council. Section 28A of the Acts Interpretation Act 1954-
1971 applies with respect to Orders in Council made for the purposes of this 
Act and, for the purposes of such application, that section shall be read and 
construed as if references to regulations therein were references to Orders in 
Council made for the purposes of this Act.

38. Regulations.

 (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations not inconsistent 
with this Act for or with respect to all matters required or permitted 

 
 
 
 
Appendix D 

391

by this Act to be prescribed and all matters that in the opinion of 
the Governor in Council are necessary or convenient for the proper 
administration of this Act or to achieve the objects and purposes of this 
Act.

 The regulations may prescribe penalties not exceeding in each case 

$100 for any contravention thereof or failure to comply therewith.

The power to regulate conferred by this subsection includes the 

power to prohibit.

(2) Regulations may be made –

(a) to apply generally or to meet a particular case or class of case;
(b) to apply throughout the State or within any part of the State.

-----oOo-----

 
 
