PR EFACE

We loped through the valley, two barefooted, 

suntanned boys, feeling a true levity of being. We 
stopped under the spreading branches of a large 
sycamore tree, and Sylvan reached up and 
snapped off a dead branch. Where it had broken 
was a split that he exploited with his knife to make 
a board of sorts. With another broken branch, a 
pine knot, some cordage, and a bow, he soon 
found his hand gliding back and forth with the 
new bow and drill set. In no time he had a coal 
glowing and smoking in a cedar tinder bundle 
that he dropped at my feet as it burst into fl ames. 
Collecting the bow and drill, he handed them to 
me with a joyful smile playing on his young face. 
I knelt down, determination fairly oozing from 
my pores. I was going to repeat the miracle I had 
just witnessed. Little did I know then that it would 
take two years of unguided determination and 
frustration before I would realize my goal. I was 
twelve years old.
 With no books or teachers, I worked on that 
bow and drill, oft en becoming livid with anger 
and hurling the set into the woods or across my 
basement. For some reason I always stopped short 
of breaking the bow, and never did I leave the 
pieces of the set where I had thrown them. 
Instead, I listened to some inner wisdom suggest-
ing that I collect them and leave them on the shelf. 

xi

Within two weeks, give or take, I would once 
again return to the set and another session of 
determined practice. Why I kept at it I do not 
know, but I knew that it was important; this 
determination has helped me ever since.
 As a youngster, I only wanted to learn enough 
skills to survive. At least, that is what I told myself. 
But with the introduction of each new skill came 
a clear knowledge that there was so much more to 
learn. As my proficiency grew with a skill, I 
learned how little I actually knew; it was both 
depressing and heartening. Now I revel in the fact 
that I never will really master any of these skills. 
Even if I learn more than any other person on the 
planet, I will only be a master if I am graded on 
the curve. However, in relation to what there is to 
know of it, I will continue to be a student, and 
that is exciting.
 What is the point in learning wilderness 
skills? Some people have a genuine interest in 
knowing how to interact and function in the wild, 
whether on a camping trip, taking an extended 
stay in the backcountry, or being unexpectedly 
stranded between populated areas. Others may 
expect to fi nd themselves in a situation requiring 
these skills for the short term and want to be pre-
pared. Still others want to know their place in the 
world or where their food comes from, and how 

xii 

PREFACE

to go without the benefi ts of the modern world. 
And there are those who, in combination with all 
of the above, merely enjoy knowledge.
 Th e question of what gear to bring on a trip 
into the backcountry is not addressed in this book 
because of the constant changes in materials, 
styles, and techniques of employing said gear. 
How to modify clothing is covered, although it is 
recommended to get the right gear for a trip via 
an expedition outfi tters or other knowledgeable 
organization.

Some people are happy in their preparedness 
with a purchased survival kit in their car, home, 
or pack, while others want to know what to do 
should they be stripped of all modern tools and 
amenities. Which group you fall into is the fi rst 
step in learning survival skills, because knowing 
this will show you how best to proceed. It must be 
noted that modern survival skills and tools can 
be augmented by the skills of the past peoples of 
the world and vice versa. Use both to further your 
knowledge in whichever bent you follow. It is true 
that survival situations appear to arise infre-
quently, but the bulk of the ones that make the 
news end poorly or are close calls, while those 
that are averted through correct action seldom 
make the headlines.

I encourage all people to get out into the land 
and work on skills of survival, not because I 
believe that they will someday need them, but 

because we have become aliens on our own planet. 
We don’t speak the language, we don’t want to 
learn it, and we don’t realize that our TVs, cell 
phones, tires, blenders, shoes, and countertops all 
come from the natural world. We as a species 
need to know how to take the pulse of our home. 
If we never take interest in its workings, we will 
continue to cause damage and forever change the 
world in which our children and grandchildren 
will dwell.
 My hope is that those who can will not only 
visit the natural world but bring children and 
friends with them, building a reservoir of good 
memories and connections involving the 
outdoors.

If you wish to further pursue the skills of sur-
vival and/or primitive living, I urge you to learn 
from many schools, people, and books. All have 
something to off er, and the worst mistake that 
students can make is to cut themselves off from a 
source of knowledge. Form an allegiance with a 
source of knowledge if you will, but not to the 
exclusion of others.

Practice what you know. You do not need to 
be in the Alaskan wilderness to do this, because 
survival skills can serve you in any environment. 
Break a task, skill, or tool down to its simplest 
components so that you can come up with 
improvements on existing techniques plus redis-
cover those of old.

 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many people helped me to get on the path that I 

now walk. First and foremost, I would like to 
thank my wife, Diane, for her steady support and 
encouragement and for caring for our boys while 
I traveled to diff erent parts of this continent in 
search of answers. Th anks to my two little men, 
Wyatt and Torrin, who didn’t give their mother 
too hard of a time while Daddy was away. A spe-
cial thanks to Mark Elbroch, who encouraged 
and advised me on this and other projects.
 Many skilled people off ered help in reviewing 
and editing parts of the manuscript, and they are 
among the very best, if not the best, in ensuring 
that solid information gets out to the public. To 
them, I send a profound thank you. Th ey are: 
Matt Richards, Estabon Fire, Keith Badger, Craig 
Childs, Henry Glick, David Wescott, Steve Watts, 
Darren Wells, and Mors Kochanski.

 Th anks to my parents for raising me in a rural 
area and giving me from dark until dark to roam 
the woods, and to my Grandpa Jack and my Uncle 
Jimmy Ferrigno for teaching me not only to fi sh, 
but to love it. Many others aided me in various 
ways for which I am grateful: Jonathan Talbott; 
Dana Stevens; Henry Glick; Paul-Ivan Der-
reumaux; Eric Muller; Raif Pomeroy; Ricardo 
Sierra; William Ward; my sisters, Alicia, Holly, 
and Kylie; my brother Galen; and Sylvan Incao, 
for getting me hooked on primitive technology.
 Th anks to the folks at McGraw-Hill for their 
incredible amount of support, Jonathan Eaton for 
this opportunity, Bob Holtzman for his patience, 
and the editing team for their insightful recom-
mendations that make this a better book than it 
might otherwise have been.

xiii

This page intentionally left blank 

INTRODUCTION

The commonly accepted “survival situation” is 

one in which people are involuntarily detained in 
a potentially hazardous setting. A plane crash, a 
shipwreck, a broken-down vehicle far off the 
beaten path, or becoming injured or lost while 
hiking are just a few of the more common ways in 
which survival situations arise. Th ese scenarios 
are usually resolved within a week—oft en in as 
little as three days—due to rescue or death.

“Wilderness living,” on the other hand, 
implies a longer-term stay far outside of settled 
society, undertaken intentionally. Strictly con-
strued, the term may diff er from “camping” only 
in the duration of the stay, but to me, it has addi-
tional implications. It means relying upon natural 
resources and learned skills to satisfy all of your 
needs. It means avoiding modern camping and 
hunting gear like nylon tents, gas stoves, and 
rifl es. It means the practice and appreciation of 
what are commonly called primitive skills—the 
skills practiced by aboriginal peoples of any part 
of the globe, from any period in history or 
prehistory.
 Th is book is divided into two parts. Part I: 
Seven-Day Survival addresses the short-term 
needs of individuals who fi nd themselves unin-
tentionally stuck in the wilderness and looking to 
get out or get rescued as quickly as possible. 

xv

Because none of us know when we might encoun-
ter such a situation, this material is for anyone 
who ever travels beyond the borders of their city 
or rural residence.

Part II: Beyond Survival: Primitive Skills for 
Wilderness Living is for readers who have a 
deeper interest in the natural world and man’s 
role within it. Although this section is not a camp-
ing manual, it will inevitably improve the outdoor 
skills of anyone who does camp, hike, hunt, or 
otherwise intentionally spend limited amounts of 
time in the wilderness. But it goes much beyond 
that in attempting to teach how to live a complete 
and comfortable material life not merely “off the 
grid” but out of sight and sound of the grid 
entirely. To gain, through these skills, an under-
standing of how aboriginal people lived is to gain 
a deeper appreciation for what it means to be 
human and a resident of the earth.
 Wilderness survival and wilderness living 
overlap in many ways. Th e skills needed to sur-
vive in the short term can come into play when 
you are living for longer periods outside of society 
and vice versa. Regardless of your situation, man 
requires the same things to maintain comfort, 
health, and life.
 While there are exceptions to every rule, the 
Rule of Th rees is a good way to remember the pri-

 
 
xvi 

INTRODUCTION

orities with regard to what the human body can 
handle in adverse wilderness settings: three min-
utes without air, three hours without shelter, three 
days without water, and three weeks without 
food. Sure, some people can hold their breath for 
more than three minutes, and three hours naked 
in the wilderness is not necessarily a death sen-
tence. But step outside on cold day in winter with 
only your indoor clothes on and see how long it 
takes for you to lose the ability to touch your 
pinky fi ngertip to the thumb tip of the same hand. 
When you can’t, say hello to the early stages of 
hypothermia!
 Assuming, then, that you’re not in imminent 
danger of drowning, the fi rst and foremost need 
is to maintain your body temperature. Th is is 
done by providing an insulating barrier between 
the body and the elements, be they heat or cold in 
their various forms (wind, water, direct sun, etc.). 
Sometimes the insulation may be clothing; other 
times the protection is off ered by the walls and 
roof of a building or other structure. Addition-
ally, in warmer climates, nights can be cold, and 
the cumulative eff ect of trying to get all of your 
chores done at night or in the daylight when you 
are not sleeping will soon leave you exhausted 
and prone to accidents and miscalculations—
with potentially deadly results. Among other 
things, shelter can keep you warm and dry, pro-
vide you with a place to sleep in comfort, and 
allow you to recover valuable energy.
 Water is available in many ways. Our very 
surroundings are loaded with it, but knowing 
how to capture it and make it potable is critical, 
and you must be able to do this on a regular, 
ongoing basis.

Inserted into the Rule of Th rees is the ability 
to make fi re. In the right confi gurations, fi re can 
act as a shelter against cold, it can prepare foods 

for easier digestion, and it can purify water. Th e 
heat can be applied to tools for fi re hardening, or 
the coals can be used in direct contact to fell trees 
or shape wood. Th e power of fi re to raise morale 
should not go unnoticed either, because that is of 
great importance if you are to survive.

It is possible for a healthy individual to last 
quite some time without food. Yet the idea of 
hunger oft en consumes us aft er missing our fi rst 
meal. (People with diabetes or who have low 
blood sugar must keep much better track of what 
and when they eat as well as have ready access to 
food and are thus in a much more dangerous situ-
ation in any survival scenario.) Unless you hunt 
or harvest wild edibles as part of your lifestyle 
now, chances are that, if you were in a survival 
situation tomorrow, you would use far more 
energy in the pursuit of food than you would gain 
from what you found, if in fact you found any-
thing. Th is is why I chose not to discuss food in 
Part I. For the short-term survival scenario, food 
should be lowest on the list of priorities, and 
actively seeking game or forage should be 
avoided.
 Th at said, being ready to harvest or kill game 
that presents itself is something that I do advise. 
Whether you are sitting tight and waiting for res-
cue or trying to fi nd your own way out of the wil-
derness, there is no harm in grabbing a couple of 
stones or rabbit sticks and keeping an eye out for 
a dinner guest or gathering easily accessible, edi-
ble plants, including fruit.
 Regardless of where I am, I take note of all 
kinds of resources as I move over the land. Th ese 
include food and water resources but also sites of 
available shelter and shelter-building materials, 
wood for tools and fi res, and other useful raw 
materials like pitch, clay, certain types of stone, 
and natural fi bers. Not only does this give me an 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

xvii

idea of the frequency with which I can expect to 
encounter them, I can also go back and collect 
them when and if they are needed.
 Th rough practice, I know how much time is 
required to construct a shelter in almost any situ-
ation. A warm and waterproof home in the pine 
forests of the U.S. Southwest takes me less than an 
hour to build; an igloo, when I am working under 
prime conditions, takes me three hours or less, 
depending on the snow-cutting tools I have at my 
disposal. If I am hoping for rescue, I’ll still make a 
shelter just in case I’m not found before nightfall. 
If I am intent on staying out for a few weeks or 
more, I’ll build a simple, temporary shelter to stay 
in while I’m building something more perma-
nent. In any situation, simple shelters are better 
than no shelter, and in dire situations, they are 
the fastest and easiest to build.
 Over the years, as I have pursued my love of 
wilderness survival along with primitive technol-
ogy, I have been disturbed by the acrimonious 
relationships that seem to prevail between the dif-
ferent bents and diff erent schools or programs. I 
hold knowledge above the petty allegiances to one 
instructor, book, or school and urge all people 
who are interested in these skills to read many 
books, attend diff erent schools, and learn under a 
variety of instructors. We all have our prejudices, 
bad habits, gems of knowledge, and skills back-
grounds. I believe that, from around 1500 a.d. 
back to the dawn of man, we have perhaps 
retained 10 percent of the myriad skills that we 

developed. To me, this means that we should be 
collaborating to unearth many of these lost tech-
nologies and forge our way forward to the past.
 No book on this subject can be truly complete. 
The skills that I have chosen to include were 
attained through much personal experience and 
consultation with many outdoor, wilderness, and 
primitive technology instructors, and they were 
informed by what readers of this type of book ask 
for in their reviews. In this book, it is assumed 
that you are dressed for the climate—and there is 
guidance on that subject in Chapter 1. Some skills 
will cover what to do if you have less, while other 
skills will require additional items; for example, 
orienteering requires a compass as well as a map 
of the area, and some fi re-making techniques are 
greatly eased with a reliable cutting edge like a 
knife.
 A topic that is covered to a lesser degree is that 
of wild edible plants. Th e reason for this is two-
fold. While I know about plants and their uses, I 
am not as well versed in this subject as would be 
necessary to give the plants their due diligence for 
all of North America. Second, there are a number 
of great books on the subject that I would be hard 
pressed to top, and these are listed in the Appen-
dix. In a nod to the value of plants as part of a 
survival diet, I have included ten plants found 
widely in North America. Th ese plants were cho-
sen for two reasons: their widespread availability 
and their nutritional value, primarily their high 
content of vitamin C and carbohydrates.

 
This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

P A R T I

SEVEN-DAY SURVIVAL

This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1

PR EPAR ING TO SURVIVE

Camping equipment, cookstoves, tents, sleeping 

bags, and the like are not addressed in this book 
because, well, then it would be a book on camp-
ing. If you practice surviving only with a tent, a 
sleeping bag, and all of your other camping ame-
nities, then you will suff er if you fi nd yourself 
without one or more of these items. If you prepare 
for the worst, then anything short of that is a 
bonus. Clothing, however, is covered, because 
most people don’t leave home without it, and if 
you are putting together a survival kit for your 
car, boat, plane, pack, or home or are venturing 
into areas in which any of the aforementioned 
survival situations is a possibility, then dressing 
appropriately is a wise move. Whether I’m in an 
arctic or a desert environment, with a car or on 
foot, I make sure that I have clothing, including 
footwear, that is suffi cient for dealing with local 
weather should the need arise.

CLOTHING

Diff erent climates and weather conditions call for 
a great variety of clothing. It is to this end that I 
strongly recommend that you pack for any excur-
sion, short or long, with the most severe weather 

3

the region can off er in mind. It may be warm now, 
but what will the temperature drop to at 2:00 or 
3:00 a.m.? Or at seven thousand feet? Do you have 
enough clothing to change into if you become 
soaked? Are you prepared for any eventuality? 
Keep these questions in mind as you prepare for a 
trip.

For colder weather, this includes an outer shell 
that eff ectively blocks the wind and repels the 
rain and an inner layer (or layers) that creates 
plenty of dead air space that can be heated eff ec-
tively by your body. In cool weather, just the outer 
shell may be all that is required, but as the tem-
perature drops, more of the insulating layer is 
called for in order to slow the heat exchange with 
the outside air.

In warmer areas, the outer shell is called for, 
but this time it is to protect your skin from the 
sun. Th e insulating layer used in cold-weather 
garments will provide no benefi t here, because 
the goal is to promote heat exchange. Th us, loose-
fi tting outerwear is the name of the game. In 
excessively hot and humid climates, forgoing 
underwear is sometimes a good idea, as jock itch 
and heat rash can become issues.

I have been surprised, when spending 
extended periods of time in hot climates, at how 
quickly my body has adjusted to the high temper-

 
 
 
4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

atures. While living in Australia’s western des-
erts, I seldom wore short pants and instead 
preferred to go in jeans, a long-sleeve, button-
front shirt, and a wide-brimmed hat unless the 
thermometer hit 52°C (125°F) in the shade; then 
shorts were nice and water was necessary.
 Th e clothing options available for today’s out-
door enthusiasts easily outstrip those of the past, 
so I’ll touch on some basic rules and describe 
how to improve inadequate clothing if that is all 
you have.
 A common expression in outdoor apparel is 
“cotton kills.” Why? Because cotton loses its insu-
lating qualities when it is wet and holds moisture 
next to your skin. Water pulls heat from your 
body twenty times faster than air, so between that 
and cooling through evaporation, it should be 
clear that cotton is only a fair-weather friend. 
Wool, on the other hand, retains heat when it is 
wet, and while this may be uncomfortable, it is 
certainly preferably to developing hypothermia.

Layering

Th ere are places on this fi ne planet of ours where 
shelter is not to be had, the ground is too hard to 
dig into, there is little or no vegetation, and no 
loose stone is available with which to create even a 
simple windbreak. The likelihood of getting 
stranded with nothing in such a place is nonexis-
tent for the bulk of the population, and I cannot 
imagine the scenario that would place anyone in 
it. Adventure racers regularly traverse extreme 
terrain with little in the way of supplies, but most 
are carefully watched and teams are closely scru-
tinized before being allowed to participate. While 
accidents do happen out in the fi eld, others hap-
pen in the planning stage—inadequate clothing, 
poor route planning, or no emergency plan. 

Clothing is easy to carry and can off er protection 
when the environment cannot. Keep clothing 
clean for better insulation and to avoid odors 
when you are hunting. Many thinner layers are 
preferable to a few thick ones. Even in subzero 
weather, a moderate amount of activity can get a 
person sweating. This causes the clothing to 
become moist (even with a wicking layer next to 
the skin, the moisture will freeze in your clothes 
before it makes it to the outside) and oft en results 
in dangerous cooling of the body. The key to 
maintaining the viability of the insulation pro-
vided by your clothing is to keep it clean and dry. 
Th erefore, as you increase your aerobic activity, 
take off layers to prevent overheating and exces-
sive perspiration. Mountaineering suits come 
with plenty of closable vents but sport a pretty 
high price tag, and for rigorous activities like 
building snow shelters or snowshoeing, the vents 
of these suits are oft en inadequate.

Covering Your Body

For cooler climates, I wear one to three pairs of 
thin wool or polypropylene (poly-pro) long 
underwear with a couple of fl eeces—either wool 
or synthetic—over them. A jacket and/or a wind-
breaker up top and snow or ski pants below leave 
me well prepared for anything from about 75°F 
down to -40°F. Large boots that allow for at least 
two pairs of wool socks to be worn at a time keep 
feet warm and blister free. Mors Kochanski (see 
the Appendix) recommends wearing three pairs 
of thick wool socks inside boots. Coats with a tie 
at the hem and at kidney level (like the U.S. Army 
coats) can make a great diff erence in maintaining 
warmth, because they prevent cold air from com-
ing in and hot air from going out as movement 
creates a bellows eff ect inside your coat. As you 

 
Clothing Modifi cations

I went out hunting one early winter day and was 

wearing cotton army pants with the tie at the 

ankles and the cargo pockets on the thigh. The 

temperature dropped from the mid-forties (Fahr-

enheit) into the low thirties, and it started driz-

zling. My choices were to head home and scrap 

the hunt or make some clothing modiﬁ cations 

and stick it out. I opted for the latter and headed 

for a somewhat sheltered rock outcropping where 

I collected a bunch of leaves and stuffed them 

into my pant legs. They were scratchy and uncom-

fortable and made stalking game impossible, 

because the leaves made quite a lot of noise. They 

also shifted down lower, requiring me to add 

more and more leaves. However, when I was still, 

my legs were warm. I am not sure that the awk-

wardness in moving or the fact that I looked and 

felt like Popeye with the spinach gone to my legs 

was worth the trouble, but it was clear that this 

could help in extreme situations. With this in 

mind, I sewed two sweatshirts, one inside the 

other, stitching the cuffs and waistbands together 

but leaving the collars separate. I then stuffed the 

space between the shirts with leaves and cattail 

down. It was better—not great—but it worked, 

provided I didn’t move too much and end up with 

a lumpy wad around my waist. Filling the space 

between the shirts to such an extent that the 

insulation stayed where I wanted it left something 

to be desired when it came to ease of movement, 

but in a pinch, it proved beneﬁ cial.

heat up due to activity, you can doff layers until 
you are able to maintain a comfortable working 
temperature. Remember to start putting layers 

PREPARING TO SURVIVE 

5

back on once you cease your activity, because 
cooling happens fast and can cause you to become 
chilled.

In desert climates, I found that once I was 
acclimatized, wearing boxers, long pants, loose, 
button-front shirts, socks, and cowboy boots as 
well as a wide-brimmed hat kept me the most 
comfortable while doing moderate work, even as 
the temperature rose past 110°F and into the 120s. 
Th e long pants protected my legs from the prickly 
desert foliage, and the boots made me feel better 
about snake strikes. (Th e trade-off s with cowboy 
boots are the lack of tread on the sole and lousy 
ankle support.) Exposure to the sun is an impor-
tant consideration, because sunburn can be debil-
itating and cause sickness or even death. 
Evaporation of moisture from your skin also must 
be taken seriously. I can remember sweating with 
no moisture perceivable on my skin—just the 
slow growth of salt crystals on my cheeks and in 
my eyebrows. A pair of jeans just out of the wash 
dried completely in less than fi ft een minutes—a 
third of what it takes in a dryer! Th e point is: don’t 
strip down and expose your skin directly to the 
sun if you want to cool off .

Head and Hands

We use our head and hands for everything, not 
only in survival, but in day-to-day living as well. 
Hats are vital in most cases, whether they protect 
us from the sun or the cold. In high heat, a wide-
brimmed hat with a crown is advisable, although 
baseball-type hats with tails in the back can pro-
vide adequate protection. To improvise, use a 
handkerchief or other cloth draped over your 
neck and hold it in place with a cap.

In colder climates, a snug hat that covers your 
head, neck, and ears is advisable, and hoods can 

 
 
 
6 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

because a clothing item is “rated to -60°F” or 
“waterproof” does not mean that you should take 
the manufacturer’s word for it. Test it out!

Footwear

Determining what footwear works for you is an 
individual process, because some people have eas-
ily warmed or cooled feet, dry or sweaty feet, and 
a number of other individual characteristics. 
Women tend to hold their heat in their torso and 
oft en suff er from cold feet, thus spurring the pro-
duction of sleeping bags with extra insulation at 
the feet for women. In really cold climates, I’ll 
wear two pairs of wool socks inside my insulated 
boots, making sure that my feet are not too 
cramped (thus reducing circulation and making 
it impossible to keep my feet warm). If I have a 
pair of new leather boots, I’ll wear them in water 
(or in the shower) in the morning and walk them 
dry. Aft er such treatment, I never suff er blisters or 
any discomfort, because the softened leather 
stretches and conforms to my foot. From then on, 
I’ll treat them with oil to keep the leather supple 
and waterproof. New synthetic boots should be 
worn and broken in prior to any trip. I cannot 
count the times I have seen hikers with debilitat-
ing blisters due to new boots. In a survival situa-
tion, blisters can herald a death sentence . . . if you 
can’t move, you can’t support yourself, and if the 
blisters become infected, then the clock is really 
ticking.

SURVIVAL KITS

Survival and first-aid kits can be purchased 
almost anywhere from gas stations to Internet 

Head covering

be of tremendous value especially if they are deep, 
because they provide shelter from all but a direct 
head wind. Additionally, hoods greatly reduce the 
heat that is lost through the collar of your coat.
 Mittens are the way to go in cold climates. I 
use a pair with a fl eece insert and a pad for wiping 
my nose on the thumb . . . a great perk. Mittens 
keep all of your fi ngers (except the thumb) in the 
same compartment, making it easier to keep your 
digits warm. Th e trade-off is a loss of dexterity 
unless you remove the mittens, which, depending 
on the task at hand, could be no big deal or some-
thing that must be done between hand-warming 
sessions. Wool or synthetics are good options, 
because they will keep your hands warm even 
when they are wet. I like to have a spare set of lin-
ers at the least but prefer to carry two pairs of mit-
tens if I can.

If you plan a trip or think that you might, get 
the clothing you want and try it out. Note what 
works and what does not, and make the appropri-
ate corrections. Th e knowledge that you gain in 
practice can save you trouble down the road. Just 

 
 
PREPARING TO SURVIVE 

7

sites that specialize in the emergency prepared-
ness market. Th ey are available in all colors and 
sizes and contain everything from Band-Aids to 
blimp puncture kits. However, with all of the 
options, you would be hard pressed to fi nd the kit 
that fully meets your precise needs. Oft en the 
store-bought kits sit in some corner of the car or 
rattle around under a seat with the owner unaware 
of the contents, which is why it is a good idea to 
build your own. I do not recommend starting 
with a store-bought kit and building on it. I once 
purchased an emergency kit for my wife’s car 
when we lived in Montana; the quality of the gear 
in the crappy bag was utter junk. Th e fl ashlight 
was fragile and broke when it was dropped, the 
tow strap was never intended to pull a kid in a 
wagon let alone a vehicle, and the tools were 
molded in what can only have been a sand mold. 
If you start from scratch, you can choose the qual-
ity of the items included and will not be disap-
pointed when you need them. You also will 
become very familiar with the contents and will 
know immediately what is needed and where it is 
when an emergency situation arises.
 Th ere are so many little items you can take 
with you on a hike that will provide a backup for 
just about any system you are likely to have with 
you. Fire starters abound in camping stores, 
water-treatment options grow with new fi ltration 
systems showing up all the time, shelter options 
with space-age materials are folding up smaller 
than ever before (although my money says that 
you can’t get them back to the size they were when 
you purchased them), and high-energy foods are 
being condensed into ever smaller, multimeal 
bricks. So which ones do you take with you and 
which ones do you leave behind?

I keep my kits quite simple, and, depending 
on the trip, I may add or remove something. Con-

sider all of the following items, then personalize 
the kit to fi t your needs and your environment. 
Aft er each trip, remember to replace items that 
you have used or that get worn out.
 A good survival kit should include:

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

First-aid kit
A sheath knife with a full tang. Th is is the 
heaviest item, but the thick, full tang on my 
knife is shaped like the handle, and even if the 
wood rotted off , I would still have a completely 
functional knife.
A lighter with an adjustable fl ame and with 
childproofi ng removed. You need to be able to 
use it eff ortlessly, especially when the temper-
ature is especially cold and your dexterity is 
decreased.
Matches in a fi lm canister with the striker 
glued to the outside of the lid. Th e striker gets 
worn and needs to be replaced or carefully 
packed to avoid wear.
A metal match is good to have as a standby. 
Also known as a Swedish FireSteel, it is a rod 
composed of ferrocerium, iron, and magne-
sium and is scraped to produce very hot show-
ers of sparks.
A film canister with four petroleum-jelly-
impregnated cotton balls. I really knead the 
jelly into the cotton, which means that these 
take up more space. If you want more fi re 
starters, do not add as much jelly and you will 
be able to squeeze a few more of them into the 
container. I have inserted these balls into a 
prebuilt tipi fi re, aft er burning for eight min-
utes, and they still had enough fl ame to get 
the fi re going with no fussing. Th ey catch eas-
ily and are a godsend in cold, wet, dire situa-
tions. See Chapter 4 for basic fire-making 
techniques.

 
 
8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Survival kit

• 

• 

• 

• 

A Mini Maglite
 fl ashlight with the spare bulb 
in the end cap is worth getting. I have left 
mine out in the woods for more than a year, 
and it still worked when I picked it up. I have 
also used it under water with no leakage.
Spare batteries labeled with the date they were 
added to the kit. In truth, every time I go on a 
trip, I replace them, or, failing that, I change 
them out every three months and use them 
around the house.
One-gallon Ziploc bags—great for holding 
water.
A Space Blanket. I used a bag version of one of 
these when I was camping in the Rockies on 
the Canadian border one February. It was 
wickedly cold (around -30°F), and my sleep-
ing bag was not doing the trick. Th e Space 
Bag worked, although the noise was pretty 
impressive, and the condensation that col-
lected on the inside and consequently wet the 

outside of my sleeping bag was a little con-
cerning. I did sleep that night, so even though 
I could not get that silver devil back into its 
container, I was happy to have thrown it in my 
bag. Th e blanket poses a challenge when you 
try to keep it on top of yourself. Placing peb-
bles in the corners with the material bunched 
around each corner and tying it with cord 
works well as a way to anchor the blanket. 
Beware of sharp rocks, because they will tear 
the material.
Parachute cord—the real stuff with a core 
made up of multiple smaller strings. Th ese 
smaller, inner cords can be pulled out and 
used individually for tasks that do not require 
the strength of the full cord.
A signal mirror. Th is takes a little practice to 
use (see the sidebar) but can be visible from 
miles away, so try it out where you will not 
alarm or irritate anyone.

• 

• 

 
PREPARING TO SURVIVE 

9

Using a Signal Mirror

Signal mirrors come with or without sighting 

4. Raise the light up until it just touches both 

holes. The two styles require different techniques 

ﬁ ngers at the base of the V. In this way, 

when you use them.

the brightest light is being shown between 

the ﬁ ngers.

5. Turning your body as a unit, move until the 

target can be seen through the V notch. 

Move back and forth slightly to paint the 

target many times; in this way, anyone at 

the target location or in the target vehicle 

will see bright ﬂ ashes of light.

If you have no speciﬁ c target, ﬂ ash as much of 

the horizon as you can (there are any number of 

issues that will limit your range, such as the loca-

tion of the sun in relation to your intended target, 

hills, trees, etc.).

 To use a signal mirror that has a clear aiming 

Signal mirror use

hole surrounded by a grid or square mesh:

 To use a mirror with no sighting hole:

2. Look through the sight at a nearby surface 

1. Hold the mirror up to your eye.

or your hand.

1. With the mirror near your face, point it 

3. Locate the reﬂ ection on the surface or on 

toward your intended target with one 

your hand, and you will see a bright spot 

hand.

in the mesh.

2. Raise your other hand at arm’s length in 

4. Carefully tilt the mirror to your target 

front of the mirror, and manipulate the 

while keeping the spot within the mesh.

mirror until the reﬂ ected light hits your 

5. Locate your target in the clear spot in the 

outstretched hand.

middle of the grid.

3. Create a V-notch sight by making the “vic-

6. Move the spot by tilting the mirror until 

tory” sign with your outstretched hand, 

the spot hits your target in the middle of 

and focus the brightest point of light on 

the clear sight hole.

your palm at the base of the V.

7. Practice.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

A candy bar or Power Bar. I prefer the Th ree 
Musketeers bar over the Power Bar, because I 
can actually bite through the candy, while the 
Power Bar provides a challenge. Kidding 
aside, the Power Bar has more substance and 
has a longer shelf life, but the candy provides 
quick energy and tastes good, too. Carry at 
least two Power Bars with you.
A wallet magnifying glass. Th is cheap, light-
weight little guy is easy to carry and provides 
yet another way in which you can get a fi re 
started. With a prebuilt fi re and a tinder bun-
dle ready to go, place the lens between the sun 
and the tinder. Move the lens from a few feet 
away ever nearer to the tinder, and watch the 
area of brighter light coalesce and form a 
small pinprick of brilliant white light (do not 
look directly at the light spot; it can damage 
your eyes). Hold the lens in place, and watch 
the smoke curl up from the tinder. With prac-
tice or observation, you will learn when the 
tinder is smoldering and can be blown into 
fl ame.
A large garbage bag. Good for collecting rain-
water, wearing as a poncho, or keeping a 
treated wound dry, among other uses.
Tweezers
Bandanna
Tourniquet
Compass
Topographical maps
Cell phone
Emergency transponder
Sewing kit

 Th ere are many items usually found in com-
mercial kits that I take or leave, depending on the 
trip I’m taking. Th ese include:

• 

• 

• 

Wire saw. Th e saws included in kits today are 
junk; if you needed to cut down a tree to sur-
vive, I can’t imagine doing so with these 
“tools.”
Fishing line and hooks. Unless you have prac-
ticed fi shing with a hand line or with a pole 
that has no reel, you may fi nd yourself chal-
lenged more than you want. Even so, they add 
little weight and take up almost no space; you 
make the call. (See Chapter 10 for fishing 
techniques.)
Emergency whistles. Th ese carry farther than 
your voice with less eff ort, add little weight, 
and oft en have an attachment ring or string. I 
prefer the whistles marketed to scuba divers, 
some of which work underwater and all of 
which work when they are wet. Again, you 
make the call.

If you are not careful, your survival kit will 
get so big that it will become part of your primary-
use gear. Being prepared is not having a backup 
for every item you bring; it is having the knowl-
edge and experience to know what to bring, 
knowing how to stretch those items in an emer-
gency, and learning to pack backups of those 
items that you cannot do without.

It is also a matter of weighing the possibilities 
of something going wrong. For example, the pos-
sibility of getting a fl at tire is reasonably high, as is 
the chance that your spare has issues (my new 
truck’s spare release was rusted beyond use aft er 
four years), especially when compared to going 
down over wilderness in an airliner, surviving the 
crash, and having no one know where you are for 
weeks. If you are traveling through country like 
North Dakota or parts of Canada, for example, 
and you get a fl at tire driving back from town one 

 
 
 
PREPARING TO SURVIVE 

11

January night, with the temperature at -40°F 
along with wind, what are you going to do? Maybe 
you could let the vehicle idle, but for how long? 
And what happens when you’re out of fuel? Given 
these two examples, where would you pack a few 
extra goodies—in your carry-on or in your vehi-

cle? If you have the space and don’t mind the extra 
weight, add items that you could get by without 
but that would make life a lot easier if you had 
them. Obviously, a fi ve-pound kit with a wool 
blanket will have much more impact on the 
weight and space in a pack than it will in a car.

 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 2

SHELTER

There are many ways in which shelter is found, 

built, or otherwise created, but the primary pur-
pose of having shelter is simply to allow our 
 bodies to maintain a core temperature of approxi-
mately 98.6°F with minimum energy expendi-
ture. With no clothes, in subfreezing weather, it is 
possible to keep warm if you engage in vigorous 
aerobic activity such as jumping jacks. Th e prob-
lem with this method of warming yourself is that 
the amount of energy expended is excessive and 
the activity cannot be maintained. Therefore, 
instead of just freezing to death, you now get tired 
and sweaty fi rst, then freeze to death. Clothes are 
oft en suffi cient shelter for temperate climates pro-
vided you maintain some small level of physical 
activity such as walking. Desert climates are 
another matter altogether and pose some inter-
esting dilemmas: extreme heat in the day coupled 
with cool nights (although this is not a given). 
Many cultures from desert and tropical regions 
cease vigorous activity from late morning to 
midaft ernoon and avoid the taxing nature of the 
hottest part of the day.

Shelter is basically a somewhat permeable 
 barrier between your skin and the environment 
that dampens the loss or gain of heat. It can also 
protect against windburn, sunburn, and direct-
contact injuries. Diff erent environments might 

13

require diff erent kinds of “shelter.” A wet suit not 
only keeps a diver warm but protects against jel-
lyfi sh stings, just as the primary purpose of work 
gloves is to protect the hands against injury rather 
than to keep the hands warm. In temperatures 
below 98.6°F, the goal is to create dead air space—
pockets of air that are heated by your body and 
not easily cooled or replaced through the action 
of wind or water. A case in point is a jacket made 
of goose down. Heat from the wearer passes 
through the breathable lining and warms the air 
pockets between the feathers. Th e windproof shell 
and feathers slow the departure of warmed air to 
such an extent that the wearer risks becoming 
overheated if too much activity is undertaken, 
even in subzero weather. (When down is wet, 
however, it loses all of its insulating qualities, as 
the feathers stick together in clumps and thus 
eliminate the dead air space or air pockets.) Some 
materials transfer heat or cold quickly, such as the 
metal in a steel-toed boot. Th is can cause very real 
problems in cold climates by transferring cold 
from the outside directly to your digits—some-
thing to be avoided for obvious reasons. A wet 
suit is another great example. Water fl ows into the 
suit via the ankles, the wrists, and the neck, form-
ing a thin layer that is trapped between the suit 
and your skin. Th e water is quickly heated by your 

 
14 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

body and can escape only via the fi ve points of 
entry, greatly slowing the loss of heated water.

In hot climates, temperature regulation is also 
imperative, because heat exhaustion and other 
heat-related illnesses can be not only debilitating 
but can kill you. Th e methodology behind desert 
shelters diff ers surprisingly little from those of 
colder climates; again, the desire is to slow or stop 
the exchange of the interior climate with that of 
the exterior. When I was in the western deserts of 
Australia, sheep with two years’ worth of wool on 
them did fine in 120+°F; however, some died 
within minutes of being shorn. Th eir ability to 
keep their body temperature steady required 
some time for adjustment, and losing their 
 thermal-regulating wool in three minutes was not 
always a suffi cient amount of time.
 Of course, the length of time that you plan on 
spending in a shelter, the climate you’re in, and 
the potential weather determine much when 
deciding what type of shelter to seek or build. For 
example, if you got stranded somewhere in New 
Mexico and had left your detailed travel plans 
with a friend, you wouldn’t build an involved and 
long-lasting adobe structure. Instead, you’d make 
something far simpler, such as a lean-to or a wick-
iup (a small, oft en tipi-like structure made from 
branches, brush, or other organic material to cre-
ate shade and cut the wind), to keep you in fi ne 
condition until aid arrived.

LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION

Regardless of the shelter type, location is para-
mount. Many drainages, washes, arroyos, draws, 
wadis, or whatever you wish to call them, have 

great ground for digging yet pose signifi cant risk 
of fl ash fl ooding in most desert areas. Th ere are 
plenty of places that do fl ood but that are not sub-
ject to fl ash fl oods, or they may fl ood only once 
every three years or so. I have made shelters in 
sands deposited by spring fl oods in areas where 
fl ooding occurred only aft er prolonged (days of) 
heavy rain. In such cases, when you seek shelter 
for a day or two, these spots can work. If you are 
not sure if the area you are in is fl ash-fl ood prone, 
fi nd a spot on higher ground. I have stood in the 
desert sun and seen torrents of water roar through 
a “dry” arroyo. Cloudbursts out of sight and up 
canyon can deposit enough water to kill the 
unwary hiker. Take into account the following 
things when you are selecting a shelter site:

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Is it safe from fl ash fl ooding?
Where would water come from, and what 
path would it take if a downpour rolled in?
Are there any dead trees or limbs that could 
fall and land in the shelter area?
Is there a potential for an avalanche or rocks 
and debris to slide down?
Are there obvious signs of large carnivore 
activity nearby? Th is could be in the form of 
trails, worn ground, lots of scat, a den, dead 
animals, or a bear tying a napkin under his 
chin while drooling and leering at you. 
Smaller critters like ground-dwelling hornets, 
ants, scorpions, snakes, and spiders and large 
amounts of bat or mouse scat are also nature’s 
way of suggesting that you fi nd an alternate 
shelter location.
Are there enough materials with which to 
build a shelter and to sustain you in the way of 
water and fi rewood?
Are you visible to potential rescuers?

 
 
SHELTER 

15

• 

Does the sun work in your favor? (In cooler 
climates in the Northern Hemisphere, having 
plenty of southern exposure is desirable, 
because it means a maximum amount of sun. 
In desert climates, a little eastern exposure 
can be welcome in the cool of the morning, 
but too much of a good thing can be 
problematic.)

 One of the fi rst orders of business is fi nding a 
suitable location. Aft er all, “a good shelter in a bad 
location is a bad shelter.” So consider the follow-
ing characteristics of your potential shelter site:

• 

Widow-makers or deadfalls:
 Always check 
the areas both overhead and upslope from 
your shelter. Are there big dead branches or 
trees that may fall and injure you, or large 
rocks that could roll when the soil below them 
is eroded by rain and squish you in your shel-
ter? Remember, your goal is to survive.

Last tip: don’t waste too much time searching 
for the perfect spot; practice building shelters in 
diff erent locations, and you’ll soon be able to tell 
how diffi cult a given location will be.

• 

• 

• 

Materials:
 An area without leaf litter, wood, 
or brush will provide a challenge when it 
comes to building a shelter, because you will 
have to bring materials from another location 
in order to build it. (Doing this even with the 
aid of a tarp is a waste of energy.) Look for 
areas with lots of building materials, such as 
fl at areas in mixed-wood forests.
Grade:
 Sleeping on a slight incline may prove 
to be a lesson in frustration. Anything beyond 
even the slightest incline can leave you 
cramped and somewhat crumpled on the 
downhill side of your shelter. Look for a fl at 
area on which to build.
Drainage:
 Th e beautiful, grassy meadow near 
the creek is quite likely a floodplain. Find 
some higher ground on which to stay. Look at 
your proposed shelter area, and try to imagine 
where water will run in a torrential down-
pour. Even if no rain is expected, river valleys 
can get chilly. Th is is not an issue when you 
are sleeping, but upon waking, things are 
likely to be damp and cold, and the valley bot-
tom will get the sun later than other areas.

TYPES OF SHELTER

I break shelters into one of three broad categories 
or a combination of them.

• 

• 

• 

 tents, clothes, and 

Portable surface shelters:
tarp/hide-covered shelters.
Stationary surface shelters: 
lean-tos, snow-
built structures, debris huts, wickiups, simple 
shelters like the lee side of a boulder, and the 
like (this would include tree shelters).
Subsurface shelters:
snow or sand) and covered pits.

 caves (existing or dug in 

If you have no blankets or a sleeping bag, some 
shelters—like lean-tos, longhouses, and any shel-
ter that has no specifi c sleeping compartment—
rely on a heat source in addition to the human 
body; i.e., they require an internal or external fi re 
or the use of heated rocks placed in the fl oor and 
covered with sand so that a comfortable tempera-
ture can be maintained. Th e drawbacks of such 
shelters include the following:

 
 
 
16 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 
• 
• 

Th ey are not easily transportable.
Th ey require time and eff ort to erect.
Th ey require maintenance to varying degrees 
(continuous fi re tending, reheating rocks each 
night).

last weeks or even months if you are not too picky. 
For more comfortable shelters that are suitable for 
long-term wilderness living, see Chapter 7.

 Th e advantages include:

FINDING SHELTER

• 

• 
• 

They provide sheltered space in which to 
work.
Th ey provide protected storage space.
Th eir “hominess” serves as a morale booster—
a function frequently overlooked but very 
valuable.

 Other shelters, like debris huts, squirrel nests, 
and bedding-fi lled, pit-type shelters, need no heat 
source other than the occupant. Th e drawbacks 
of such shelters include the following:

• 

• 

They often lack work and storage space 
(although this is easily remedied with an 
awning).
They may (read: 
nights to get used to.

definitely will) take a few 

 Th e advantages include:

• 

• 

• 
• 

Th ey need little to no maintenance depending 
upon length of stay.
They can be readily constructed in most 
environments.
Th ey require relatively little time to construct.
Th ey need no heat source.

 Th e shelters discussed in this chapter are all 
“expedient” ones; they are relatively quick to con-
struct and are suitable for survival situations of a 
week or less, though their use can be stretched to 

Th e quality of shelter for which you are looking 
will vary greatly depending upon your situation. 
Are you looking for temporary relief from rain or 
wind? In such a case, simply hunkering down 
under a hemlock or pine tree or moving to the lee 
side of a hill will do the job. But suppose you fi nd 
yourself stranded in the rising heat of the Sono-
ran Desert, or you are lost as darkness arrives and 
it is both rainy and cold. What then? Sometimes a 
good shelter can be found with little eff ort, while 
other times it would be more expedient to build 
one with the materials available.
 When I was hitchhiking through Germany as 
a teen, I found myself out in the south German 
countryside at midnight. Th ere were no cars or 
visible towns, so I walked a ways looking for a 
haystack to crawl into. Well, farming had changed 
from what I had read about it in a World War I–
era book, and no welcoming haystacks beckoned. 
Hell, I would have settled for an unfriendly one at 
that point. Eventually, I got so tired I crawled into 
some weeds and quickly crawled out, brushing 
my stinging cheeks with my sleeve in an eff ort to 
ease the nettle’s rebuke. I did fi nd some shrubs 
and was amazed at what we, as humans, will set-
tle for if we are exhausted enough. Th is lesson 
would be reiterated in the military, where I 
learned that it is, in fact, possible to sleep stand-
ing up in the chow line.
 Over the years, I have taken shelter under 
rock overhangs and still-leafy fallen trees, in 

 
caves, under glaciers, in shrubs, beneath small 
trees, and under a variety of found man-made 
objects. Most of these shelters have pros and cons 
and, in some cases, real hazards associated with 
them. Rock overhangs may provide great dry 
spots from which to make a signal fi re, yet they 
could have loose rock that could fall for no per-
ceivable reason. Fallen trees can off er great pro-
tection from wind and, with some modifi cation, 
from rain, but they may be unstable or have dead 
and hanging limbs above them. Caves, especially 
those with small, sheltered openings, can be great 
for shelter; however, some can be subject to fl ash 
fl ooding and be home to poisonous reptiles and 
insects and large mammals—not to mention the 
viruses that can be in the dust and present a dan-
ger when they are inhaled. Th e ground below gla-
ciers is usually muddy and can be unstable, not to 
mention treacherous. Venturing into ice fi elds 
and caves should be left to those who have the 
technical knowledge and equipment to do so 
safely. Shrubs—well, they’re shrubs—what can 
you expect . . . some modifi cations can go a long 
way. Found objects such as boards or large pieces 
of bark can provide shelter to one degree or 
another.

It is very easy to simply lament your predica-
ment and whine your wishes to the surrounding 
countryside, but that gets you nowhere fast. So 
act! It is one thing to suff er the cold when your 
jacket zipper is busted and you’re running over to 
the neighbors, because relief is close at hand. Out 
in the wild places, if you do not act, you may die. 
It’s as simple as that. No one’s going to hand you 
a blanket and a cup of cocoa—not unless you 
have fi lled out a detailed trip plan and distributed 
it to local rangers and friends, or you have a 
magic lamp in your pack with at least one good 
rub left in it.

SHELTER 

17

I say it all the time: if you want the skills, 
 practice them. Th en you can quickly spring to 
the correct actions at the moment they are 
required.

WOODLAND SHELTERS

Creating simple shelters in areas with plenty of 
leaf litter, sticks, and other forest debris is quite 
easy and fast, provided you have the willingness 
to get down and dirty. Th e materials are all there, 
but signifi cant quantities need to be gathered if 
you aim to be warm and dry. Th e learning curve 
is steep if you are willing to spend three or four 
nights in a row in a given shelter. Th is is to say 
that, in practice, if you are to have faith in a shel-
ter’s ability to do its job, I strongly urge you to 
commit to four nights or more in a row in the 
shelter of your choice. Typically, the following 
process is what happens to people who are trying 
to learn how to build shelters:

1. On night one, you crawl into the shelter 
and quickly discover that it is nothing like 
your bed, and your resolve tends to dwin-
dle as you get cold and tired. You wish that 
you had made an extra pile of leaves near 
the door or that you had completed the 
shelter.

2. You fi nally acknowledge that morning has 
come. You are crabby, tired, and cold as 
you curse me and the horse I rode in on. 
You rally and add material to the shelter, 
making it bombproof. On night two, you 
are leery about the coming night, yet 
fatigue helps you sleep better. Your work 
during the day pays off ; you are warmer at 

 
 
 
 
 
18 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

fi rst but begin to wake in the wee hours of 
the morning as cold creeps in.

3. Feeling slightly better about the shelter’s 
potential to live up to the title of “shelter,” 
you add yet more insulation the next day. 
On night three, because of improvements 
to the shelter and fatigue, you sleep well 
the whole night through, and in the morn-
ing you have faith in the shelter. When 
rains come, more adjustments are needed 
to prevent drips, but aft er the fi rst night of 
rainy forays to correct leaks, your shelter 
is dry. You now have not only the knowl-
edge to prevent many of these discomforts 
in future shelters, you also have faith that 
this shelter will help you to survive.

 As a kid, I was stranded on the bank of a river 
during a canoe trip. It was pouring rain and get-
ting dark. My friend and I had no tent, tarps, or 
food; we had only a canoe and some very wet 
sleeping bags. I knew that we should build a shel-
ter with the leaves all around us, but I was cold 
and wet and had no faith in the ability of leaves to 
keep us warm for the night. My experience with 
shelter was as described above, yet without the 
resolve to fi x my fi rst shelter. I spent the night 
shivering in a soaking sleeping bag. Had I fol-
lowed the above three steps, I could have been 
warm, though admittedly soggy, within half an 
hour. It is important that you practice this skill if 
you hope to employ it eff ectively in the future.

Squirrel Nests

If you don’t have the time to make a “real” shelter, 
then a simple pile of leaves will suffi ce, provided it 
is large enough for the type of weather in the area; 
i.e., a larger pile for cold weather and a smaller 

pile for warm weather. There are some finer 
points, however, when you are mounding and 
sleeping in a pile of leaves.
 Th e fi rst time I tried it was when I was work-
ing for a wilderness survival program and all par-
ticipants were building debris-type huts 
(discussed in the next section). I was too lazy to 
build yet another shelter for two nights of accom-
modation and therefore waited until the last min-
ute before I scraped a rather pathetic pile together. 
Th at night I made a trough in the leaves, lay down, 
and pulled the leaves over me. It was great! I was 
toasty even as the temperature fell into the forties. 
Around 2:00 a.m., I awoke cold as hell and 
glanced around to fi gure out why. Th ere, glinting 
in the moonlight, and lying on my shoulder as 
still as could be, was the reason—one single, soli-
tary oak leaf. Th at lonely little leaf, while perhaps 
well intentioned, was wholly inadequate for the 
task of keeping me warm. Th us, I learned that 
moving (to include heavy breathing) in a squirrel 
shelter was to be avoided at all costs. Hence, the 
following innovations were born.
 Th e fi rst technique I used was to learn how to 
sleep in one position. I did this by sleeping on a 
bench made up of two seven-inch-diameter logs 
placed side by side with two other logs laid cross-
ways beneath them. Th e fi rst few nights were less 
than great, but then, as is always the case, I 
adapted and slept well. In the squirrel nest, this 
translated to lying down, getting situated and 
covered, and falling asleep. Waking in the morn-
ing aft er not having moved left me with little 
desire to lie in bed, and I would promptly exit the 
leaves, well rested.
 Th e other method I used was to situate my leaf 
pile next to an object, such as a fallen tree, a rock 
outcropping, or a berm, and create a second con-
tainment object for the other side. Th is was quite 

 
 
SHELTER 

19

to that of wool. By creating an area of dead air 
space around you, it is possible for your body to 
heat it up, and if adequately stuff ed, it will keep 
you warm (even when wet). Once you have your 
spot picked out, the initial construction goes 
pretty quickly. Following are guidelines for the 
construction of a one-person debris hut.

1. A ridgepole needs to be located. It should 
be longer than you are tall by at least two 
feet and strong enough to hold your 
weight. Make sure that there are no ants or 
other critters already using it as a home.
2. Find something about waist height with 
which to support one end, such as a fork in 
a tree, a branch, or a rock. Or, you can 
construct something using a Y stick or 
two. (Be careful; I know of one fellow who 
broke his arm when his improperly 
secured support collapsed.)

3. Your ridgepole should run from your sup-
port to the ground. When you lie down 
underneath it on your back, your toes 
should be a couple of inches below the 
ridgepole at the lower end. It is also a good 
idea to check for roots or rocks that may 
be uncomfortable to sleep on. To measure 
the height of the upper end, roll onto your 
side. Your upper shoulder should be one 
hand’s length from the bottom of the 
ridgepole. These measurements are for 
cold weather. In warmer times, I make my 
shelters more spacious inside and use less 
insulation outside.

4. Once the pole is set, start placing your rib-
bing against it, creating an A-frame shape. 
Th e ribbing is merely a bunch of sticks 
from thumb thickness to wrist thickness 
that are laid against the ridgepole. It is 

Squirrel nest

eff ective in keeping the leaves around me while 
allowing for a little movement. Such a bed can be 
put together in minutes and has other applica-
tions. I have, upon being surprised by a cloud-
burst or thunderstorm, gathered a pile of leaves or 
grasses, shucked my clothes, buried them beneath 
the pile, and squatted atop it—a king on my own 
little kingdom or a wet, naked guy squatting on a 
pile of damp leaves in the woods. Your choice, but 
either way, when the rain stopped I had dry togs 
to put on.
 Any improvements beyond this “shelter” and 
you move into the realm of the debris hut.

Debris Huts

Squirrel shelters are to a debris hut as a pile of 
wool is to a sweater.
 Th ere are many ways of building shelters and 
many environments in which to build them. Th e 
woodland shelter described here is called the 
debris hut, popularized by Tom Brown Jr. It is a 
small, easily constructed, snug little “burrow” in 
which you can keep warm and dry if you build it 
correctly.
 Th e debris hut is nothing more than a frame-
work of sticks fi lled and covered with leaves and 
other forest debris. Th e value of leaves is similar 

 
 
 
 
 
2 0 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

important that your ridgepole does not 
extend too far beyond the support and 
that the ribbing does not protrude more 
than three or four inches above the ridge-
pole. Th is prevents water from running 
down the ribbing or ridgepole and into 
your shelter. At the shoulders, the ribbing 
should be one hand’s length away on either 
side. To measure, lie on your back, cen-
tered under the ridgepole, and with your 
right hand, reach across your chest and 
put a twig into the ground one hand’s 
length away from your shoulder. Repeat 
for the left side. As the ribbing is applied, it 
can taper in toward your feet. Until you 
have built a good number of shelters, it 
would be wise to periodically get in and 
check it for size. If you can’t breathe with-
out moving the shelter’s frame, you might 
want to enlarge it. If you have enough 
room for a social event, you ought to 
downsize.

5. At this point, you should have something 
resembling a wooden tent with one open 

end. Place ribs over one-half of the open 
end; the other half will serve as your door-
way. Another option is to completely block 
off the end and remove a few of the ribs 
from the side for a doorway. Diff erent situ-
ations require diff erent types of “doors.” 
More on doors later.

6. Small, brushy material like the thin, upper 
branches of fallen dead trees is now laid in 
a crosshatch manner over the ribbing. Th e 
purpose is to keep the soon-to-be-applied 
debris from falling down into the shelter 
and your eyes.

 With the frame complete, it’s time to collect 
leaves for insulation. I use the “digging dog” tech-
nique. Start well away from your shelter and, 
using your fingers as a rake, move backward, 
fl inging the leaves between your legs and toward 
the shelter. In very short order you should have a 
big pile of leaves (check them for ants before put-
ting them on your shelter). Start gathering 
leaves . . . lots and lots of leaves. Keep gathering 
leaves; do not stop. Cover the entire shelter with 

Debris hut skeleton

 
 
 
SHELTER 

21

mounds of leaves, and then pack them down. Th e 
most eff ective packing technique I have found is 
to actually slide the leaves down along the ribs. 
Basically, I reach up to the top of the pile and 
bring my hands downward in the same direction 
as the ribbing. It is shockingly disappointing to 
see how far leaves will compact in this manner. 
Continue with the piling and packing until the 
leaf layer is about four feet thick. In summer, an 
arm’s length seems to do the trick. You can’t cheat 
here. You could loosely pile leaves to four feet and 
then freeze all night—not the greatest idea in the 
world. Once the shelter is covered, lay loose bark 
or dead branches over it to keep the leaves from 
blowing away.
 Now it’s time to stuff the inside! Some people 
like to be picky here and remove all of the sticks 
and other lumpy debris from their leaf pile before 
they stuff their shelter to bulging with it. Others 
pick out the undesirables as they fi nd them while 
attempting sleep. Once the inside is packed prop-
erly, you should have trouble getting into your 
shelter the fi rst time due to the quantity of leaves. 
I always start barefoot and slowly worm my way 

in until I am all the way into the shelter. I then 
begin rolling around to pack the leaves, giving me 
more space for—you guessed it—stuffi ng with 
more leaves! I also use my legs to push and com-
press the leaves into the shelter as much as possi-
ble. It is amazing how compressed those leaves 
become in a short period of time. It’s better to 
gather more than you think you will need while 
in leaf-gathering mode than at 1:00 a.m. when 
you’re too cold to sleep. In cold weather, this step 
is vital, so do it right and don’t skimp.

It is a good idea to keep your eyes closed as 
you enter and exit the shelter. Th is way, you can 
avoid any falling debris. I also give the ridgepole a 
good kick before entering; this knocks most of the 
loose material out of the “ceiling” and decreases 
the chance of having it fall in my eyes.

Th ere are a number of ways to construct a 
door for this type of shelter, the fi rst of which is 
the plug. Th is door type consists of two disks, 
usually made by loosely “weaving” green 
branches, fashioned in the shape of the door 
opening. Leaves are sandwiched between the two 
(like an Oreo cookie), and then they are lashed 

Commpleteed debbris hut

 
 
2 2 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Door with leaves

together with more green branches or cordage. 
When you crawl backward into the shelter, the 
plug is pulled into the opening (it should be a tight 
fi t) and left for the night.
 Another option, one that I prefer, is to have a 
“door pile”—a heap of leaves that I compress with 
my arms and pull in aft er me. Once pressure is 
released, the pile of leaves expands, nicely fi lling 
the opening.

I have never slept as well as the nights I’ve 
spent in my debris huts, but I must warn you that 
your fi rst few nights may not be restful. Leaves do 
not immediately off er the same security that we 
associate with blankets. However, aft er a night or 
two, you might fi nd the leaves preferable.
 Th ere is no end to how elaborate a debris hut 
you can make. I’ll oft en settle for the basic hut 
with an awning over the door, or maybe a little 
area in which I can crouch and work on rainy 
days. If I’m in a bit of a rush, I’ll just pile some 
leaves together and burrow in.

Debris Hut Hints

I recommend that you have a big pile of spare 

leaves outside your shelter; this way, in the event 

of a leak, you have the patching material ready. 

You will also ﬁ nd that, after a stay of a few weeks 

in one shelter, the bedding leaves will be pulver-

ized into powder. You’ll need to periodically pull 

out the leaves, heap them on top of the hut, and 

get fresh ones for the inside.

 For your ﬁ rst attempt, you may want to substi-

tute a sleeping bag for the bedding leaves. This 

will allow you to become familiar with sleeping 

inside the debris hut. Then you can move on to 

using just leaves. Please understand that expo-

sure is a real danger in the outdoors. Shelter 

building should be done in warm weather with 

backups until you have a ﬁ rm grasp and under-

standing of the chosen type of shelter. Good luck 

and sweet dreams.

 
 
SHELTER 

2 3

Ponderosa Forest Shelters 
(Pine Needle Shelters)

When traveling, I oft en ask myself survival ques-
tions like: Where would I get liquid if I needed it 
now? What would I do for shelter tonight? Dur-
ing many a cross-country trip, I wondered what I 
would do for shelter in the ponderosa and other 
pine forests. Th ese forests of central and western 
North America are extensive and can be found 
from southern Canada south into Mexico and 
from the Pacifi c Coast east to Oklahoma and 
Nebraska. Given their widespread occurrence, it 
seemed only fi tting to address shelter in such 
places. While any pine needles can be used in the 
making of a shelter, some trees, like the ponde-
rosa pine, build up thick layers of needles under 
their branches while others do not. Th e latter 
require signifi cantly more work to collect and put 
to use. 
 Th e greatest asset from a shelter standpoint 
regarding ponderosa forests has to be the thick 
thatch of long needles beneath the branches of the 
trees. Following this are the remains of the trees 
themselves. Often with the inside rotted out, 
boards are much of what’s left aft er a tree has 
fallen. In some areas, wood can be a little scarce, 
so you may have to settle for a simpler shelter—

more along the lines of the squirrel nest. With no 
scouting and no rush, I have easily constructed a 
needle shelter in forty-five minutes. Knowing 
what to do is only a bit of the battle; motivating 
yourself to get busy is the rest of it.

Look for an area with a good supply of build-
ing materials, ideally an area with a few dead 
pines in the vicinity as well as live ones for their 
dropped needles. Th e ponderosas oft en have a 
thick mat of needles under their branches.

Place two logs or bundles of sticks (the walls) 
parallel to each other and wide enough apart to 
accommodate your body comfortably. Build the 
walls tall enough so that you can fit under a 
branch placed across both walls.

Lay wooden crosspieces spanning the walls at 
both ends in place of a headboard and footboard 
on a conventional bed. Th ese should be far enough 
apart to allow your body to fit between them 
lengthwise (feet at one end and head at the other), 
plus you should have an additional foot at your 
feet and another foot at your head (i.e., your body 
plus two feet). Gather needles from under the sur-
rounding trees by sliding one hand, palm up and 
fl at, under the thatch. Place your other hand over 
the palm of the fi rst hand and lift the “plate” up. 
Fill the area outlined by the walls and crosspieces 
you have just made with needles. Do not skimp; it 

Pine woods frame

 
 
 
 
24 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

is far easier to remove needles when you are hot 
and tired than it is to get up and gather them 
when you are cold and tired!

If long pieces of dead tree trunk are available, 
lay these over the crosspieces lengthwise until you 
have a complete roof. If only short wood is avail-
able, continue laying them across the walls. (Note: 
I have been able to fi nd wood in lengths exceed-
ing my requirements by any number of feet. By 
allowing these pieces to overhang the entrance 
end, I create an awning under which I can keep 
clothes or other items dry. Th is works well if the 
roof is fl at or has enough needles on top of it to 
prevent rain from running down the wood to the 

Completed pine woods shelter

interior. Even so, if you look at the bright side, it 
would only leak when it rains; the rest of the time 
it would be fi ne.)
 Gather lots of needle plates and cover the shel-
ter completely. If there is a chance of rain and you 
don’t want to get wet, add a solid arm’s length 
(about thirty inches) of needles or get more wood 
and place it over the shelter. You can do this shin-
gle style, or you can lean pieces against it, A-frame 
style, down the whole length. Any wood that is 
exposed to the sky will help get water to the 
ground in ways other than through your shelter, 
provided it is angled correctly. It may make for a 
prickly bed if you are wearing thin clothes, but 
when you are cold and tired, it is a small price to 
pay for warmth and shelter.
 Th e best recommendation I can off er is to 
practice. Do not wait until you need a shelter 
and then try to read up on it! Make many diff er-
ent types of shelters, mix and match them, and 
see what works and how. Th en, if you ever have 
need of a shelter, you will be prepared to take 
action.

Bark or wood slab shingling

 
 
SHELTER 

2 5

Group Shelters

There are a great number of group-shelter possi-

needs an ongoing ﬁ re to keep the occupants 

bilities, some more practical than others depend-

warm, so why not make a squirrel nest in the 

ing on your situation. Many group shelters found 

back? You can burrow in and allow yourself a full 

in books are made for the long term and require a 

night’s sleep with no waste of wood or constant 

lot of know-how, materials, and time. Hasty shel-

ﬁ re tending.

ters, group or otherwise, are not generally classi-

 When creating group shelters, be aware that, 

ﬁ ed as “shelters” because of their lack of form 

as with so many things, your imagination is your 

and peoples’ inability to think of a shelter as 

only limitation. The ideas put forth here can be 

something without any real structure or ability to 

improved upon, altered, or discarded altogether, 

stand on its own. The longhouses of museums 

and new ones can be born. The only principles to 

and the past are seldom practical given the 

which you must adhere are those of shelter, 

amount of green bark needed for the construc-

because the body’s need to maintain 98.6°F does 

tion and the lack of large trees.

not change. If you are constructing a shelter, pay 

 Almost any shelter type can be modiﬁ ed into 

careful attention to the structural integrity of the 

a group shelter; for example, debris huts can be 

design and materials. Arms have been broken 

built in close proximity to one another and 

through shoddy construction and poorly thought-

awnings constructed between them. Thatch can 

out designs. Rotten wood, the weight of water-

be used to protect a large area, and wind-packed 

logged leaves and snow, and the size and 

snow can be excavated to accommodate large 

placement of the ﬁ re pit and smoke hole all factor 

numbers as well. Additionally, shelter combina-

into the construction of a survival shelter. Remem-

tions can provide some of the creature comforts 

ber, the goal is to survive, not to get crushed, 

we love and miss when we are in the wilds. A lean-

burned, or smoked like a piece of venison. Dry 

to can provide a great sheltered work space but 

and warm will sufﬁ ce.

SNOW SHELTERS

Snow is a great insulator and can provide you 
with a fi ne shelter in short order. Th e diff erent 
types of snow shelters are many, but the principles 
are similar. Snow shelters can be divided into two 
basic categories: those that are excavated from a 
large snowbank or mound, and those that are 
constructed using blocks of wind or manually 
packed snow. Your abilities and the materials 

present will dictate the type you build. I have seen 
an igloo constructed in little time—less than an 
hour—and have built them unassisted in less than 
three hours. (With more practice I know that the 
time could be cut by half.) I recommend that you 
take a look at the documentary Nanook of the 
North for a great demonstration of igloo building. 
Snow caves are great and can be as simple as a 
hollowed-out tube for sleeping or more elaborate 
with group areas, sleeping compartments, etc.

 
26 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

 Th e three main issues with snow shelters are 
that they are airtight, require that the occupant 
be suffi ciently insulated from the snow, and blend 
in with the environment, making it diffi cult for 
rescuers to locate them.

In order to vent out the stale air, create a ven-
tilation hole near the highest point of each room 
near the upper portion of the wall above the level 
where you will normally have your head. Do not 
make this a vertical hole, but a horizontal one. 
In this way, you will avoid blockage from blow-
ing or falling snow. However, heat will also be 
lost. 
 Carbon dioxide will not leave via a high vent 
but must be trapped in a sink (a pit that is lower 
than the fl oor of the living space), or it must have 
access to a lower vent. Carbon monoxide is pro-
duced by camp stoves and is lighter than oxygen 
but only slightly (its specifi c gravity is .96; that of 
oxygen is 1.00); therefore, it will not sink like the 
carbon dioxide, nor will it rise. Rather, it will 
spread through the shelter and will not vent easily 
unless you are willing to sacrifi ce all of your heat. 
Do not use a gas stove in your shelter! A seal-oil 
kudlik, in the style of the Inuit, may produce less 
carbon monoxide at a slower rate but should still 
be used sparingly.

If you have ski poles, one can be shoved 
through the roof handle fi rst, from above. To 
maintain the vent, wiggle the pole around, espe-
cially if it is snowing. As warm air is vented out, it 
can enlarge the vent hole and cause excessive heat 
loss, so it must be partially blocked periodically. 
In good conditions (15°F and cooler), the warm 
air cools somewhat as it passes through the snow, 
slowing or even halting this problem. A stick can 
be substituted for the pole, but do whatever is nec-
essary to ensure that fresh air comes in and stale 
air goes out.

Avalanche Safety

While we were tracking in Montana, my wife and I 

ventured to the edge of a lake. The land beyond 

dropped sharply about ﬁ fteen to twenty feet, and 

a signiﬁ cant drift had formed with a bit of an 

overhang. Beyond it the land was ﬂ at. We walked 

to the edge, and with a grin at my wife, I stamped 

my foot. Chaos! The mini-snowfall left me no 

frame of reference with which to orient myself as 

I tumbled, but it did give me just a peek into what 

it might be like to be caught in an avalanche and 

how little control I would have.

 Avalanches are a very real threat in steep ter-

rain, and to the uninitiated, danger is often not 

recognized until the snow begins to fall with tre-

mendous power and awe-inspiring results. If you 

live in or visit an area prone to avalanches, take a 

course on avalanche forecasting and seek the 

advice of local forest service, park, or rescue 

personnel.

 Having or getting material with which you 
can insulate yourself from the snow is crucial. 
Without it, the snow or ground on which you are 
in contact will leach the heat right out of you. I 
like to use conifer boughs due to their springy 
nature, but sticks with all of their branches 
removed and laid parallel to one another work 
too. Grasses, hides, leaves, brush, or anything else 
that will keep you off of the snow or ground with-
out wicking water up to you will help. If I can 
aff ord the materials and time, I put on an eight-
inch layer of boughs (not compressed) with 
another eight-inch layer of grasses on top. Oft en, 
this option will not be available and you will have 

 
 
 
one without the other. Shift ing around in your 
sleep can soon have your hip nestled into the 
snow—something that is best avoided.
 Maybe you don’t want to be rescued, but if you 
do, colorful spare clothing or other man-made 
colored objects need to be staked to the outside of 
the shelter and cleaned of new snow periodically 
so that rescuers have an easier time spotting your 
shelter.
 Other considerations are those that go along 
with all campsites and shelter locations. Be alert 
for snags, dead branches, and trees nearby that 
could fall on you. Watch out for loose rocks, the 
potential for avalanches, fl oods, and other haz-
ards. Use your head to determine a good spot.

Snow Caves and Trenches

A snow cave may be built anywhere snow collects 
in quantities sufficient to accommodate the 
desired interior space—especially on the lee side 
of objects such as hills, berms, hedgerows, stone 
walls, and slopes.
 Creating a snow cave can be fun, but in a sur-
vival situation, the goal is to get out of the weather 
ASAP! Your shelter needs to be big enough to 
comfortably accommodate your body so that 
blood fl ow is not restricted and cramping is pre-
vented. (Each occupant should be able to lie down 
completely without having to keep any part of the 
body bent and should be able to sit or kneel with-
out having to hunch over.) Remember, though—
the larger the area, the more it takes to heat it. A 
sleeping tube branching off of a larger work or 
storage space allows you to access your gear and 
change clothes without having to get out into the 
elements. Include an air hole and some insulation 
(branches, grasses, leaves) to lie on or sit on, and 
you’re all set.

SHELTER 

27

Blocking off excavation opening

Floor plan and elevation view of a shelter

 Th e entry should be lower than both the work 
area and the sleeping area to prevent warmed 
interior air from fl owing out while cold outside 
air comes in and to give the carbon dioxide a 
place in which to sink. Th is does not mean, how-
ever, that all the snow to be excavated must come 
out through the tiny entry tunnel. Removal of so 
much snow in this manner is labor intensive and 
time consuming, and it requires that you are in 
direct contact with the snow for extended periods 
of time. Th is may cause your clothes to become 
moist with both snowmelt and sweat. Instead, 
create an opening or two (excavation ports) that 

 
2 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

are larger than the fi nished door will be to pro-
mote easy snow removal. Th ese ports can be fi lled 
in later with snow blocks if conditions allow, or 
you may have to make a lattice with sticks to hold 
loose snow piled against it until it hardens. Use a 
shovel, stick, or anything that can move snow effi -
ciently. Make sure to maintain an air vent. Th e 
same method is used in making the entry for a 
quinzhee, described in the next section.
 Many variations are possible with snow caves. 
Use your imagination and remember the func-
tion of a shelter—to protect you from the wind 
and weather and allow heat to build up beyond 
that of the outside air. You may envision a grand 
series of rooms with vaulted ceilings when all you 
need to do is to burrow under a conifer with 
spreading branches that have created a cave as the 
snow built up around them. As a kid in upstate 
New York, I used to wander through the woods 
and build forts where white pines and birch sap-
lings were bent, their tips to the ground from the 
weight of the snow. Even in windy weather, these 
little caves were warmer than being out in the 
open.
 One useful variation on the snow cave is the 
snow trench. If conditions are conducive to cut-
ting igloo blocks, excavate a trough that is three 
or four feet deep. Make it long enough and wide 
enough to accommodate your body as you lie 
down. Th e bottom can be covered with boughs 
for insulation from the ground. A fl at or A-frame 
roof can be placed over it with snow slabs and a 
vent hole poked into the roof. Th e interior volume 
should not be so great it will be hard to heat with 
your body or a candle. A sloping ramp or a step 
will lead down to the door—usually a block of 
snow. Doors that are inside the shelter and pushed 
into the opening from inside are fi ne, but they 
require more interior space, while doors that are 

pulled into the opening aft er you enter can be 
tricky to place precisely. Whichever entry you 
choose, make sure that your digging stick, snow 
knife, or other tool is inside with you, because the 
door block can freeze to the shelter and make 
your exit tougher than your entry. Th ese short-
term, expedient emergency shelters can be very 
eff ective in a pinch.

Quinzhees

Th e quinzhee is, in essence, a snow cave for those 
times when no naturally occurring drifts are 
found or when snow quality is such that igloo 
construction is tricky due to warmer tempera-
tures (15°F and warmer) and poor-quality snow 
(granular, powder, wet, or loose), and you need a 
shelter within three to four hours. Here are the 
steps to build a quinzhee:

1. Lay out a fl oor plan of the interior, keeping 
in mind that the smaller the volume, the 
more easily the shelter is heated. Addition-
ally, a shelter that is too small will not be 
able to accommodate you for obvious rea-
sons. Th e most reliable technique is to lie 
down and mark out an area that is slightly 
larger than each person. Another option is 
to break a stick that is as tall as the tallest 
member of your party and another that’s a 
little wider than this person’s shoulders. 
Use these measuring sticks to lay out the 
interior. If necessary, include a little space 
for gear.

2. Pile snow into a mound (do not hard pack 
it) or dome that is larger than the footprint 
or fl oor plan by at least a foot on the radius. 
Make sure that the dome is tall enough so 
that you can kneel, then add two feet. Th e 

 
 
 
SHELTER 

2 9

excavation. If the snow sits for too long, it 
can get really hard and make excavation a 
real bear of a task.

5. Excavate the pile not only by way of the 
intended door but also through one or two 
large openings elsewhere on the shelter. 
(Excavation tools can be anything from 
emergency shovels to a slab of wood, a 
stone, bone, shell, or anything else that 
will aid in scraping or otherwise remov-
ing snow.) Th ese openings can be refi lled 
later and will greatly cut down on the time 
required to complete the shelter. Th ey also 
will minimize the time you spend crawl-
ing around in the snow. Depending on the 
snow, you may be able to fi ll in the excava-
tion doors with blocks of snow, or you may 
need to create a crude latticework of sticks 
to help hold looser snow until it can 
harden. As in number 3 above, use the 
ten-inch twigs as guides for thickness; 
once a twig end is exposed on the inside of 
the shelter, stop digging there.

6. Make sure to leave a good six to eight 
inches or more of snow on the ground 
where you will be sleeping. Th is not only 
insulates you from the ground but also 

Cross section of a quinzhee wall with ten-inch 

sticks

two-foot size increase not only allows for 
the settling of the snow but also for a 
raised fl oor (six to eight inches insulate 
you well from the ground) and a thick 
roof. One option is to pile gear together 
and cover it with snow, and when you bur-
row in, remove it for easy excavation.
3. Insert pencil-thick twigs that are about ten 
inches long all over the mound at one-foot 
or greater intervals. Th ese will act as thick-
ness gauges when you are excavating the 
inside. When you expose the end of a twig, 
stop excavating that area.

4. Let the pile sit for no more than one and 
one-half to two hours. During this time, 
the snow will harden enough to allow for 

Excavated quinzhee with ports partially ﬁ lled in

 
 
 
 
 
30 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Floor plan and elevation view of a shelter

allows the area around the entry to be 
lower, creating a trap or cold sink for the 
colder air. In addition, it puts you closer to 
the ceiling where the warmer air is 
trapped.

7. Prior to closing things up, you may want 
to put some of your supplies such as 
boughs for bedding into the shelter rather 
than drag them through the small 
doorway.

8. A block of snow, a backpack, or other gear 
can be used to close the door once you are 
inside.
9. Add a vent.

Igloos

Igloos are good shelters for open, windy areas, 
although they can be built anywhere that condi-
tions allow. Two moderately experienced people 
can expect to build an igloo in less than two 
hours, and one person can build one in less than 

three hours, provided it is not their fi rst attempt. 
Nanook (of the North) of documentary fame built 
a huge one in about an hour.

Prime conditions for igloo building are +15°F 
and colder with wind-packed snow that dents 
slightly and squeaks like Styrofoam when you 
walk on it and when conditions have not ranged 
above freezing.
 Th is is not to say that igloos cannot be con-
structed in other conditions, just that they take 
more work, may be weaker initially, and may not 
be as practical for a survival shelter as perhaps a 
quinzhee or snow cave. If you are hell-bent on 
building an igloo and the snow is not packed, 
simply make a long mound about three feet high, 
pack it well, and let it sit overnight. Th e next day it 
will be ready for igloo blocks if the temperature 
has remained below freezing.
 To build an igloo, you will need a snow- 
cutting tool. Saws and machetes work beautifully; 
a wooden snow knife works well but requires 
more eff ort to use.

 
 
 
 
 
SHELTER 

31

extra foot on either end to accommodate sleeping 
bag ends, blankets, footgear, hats, etc. Look at 
your diagram and note that all occupants will be 
on a sleeping platform; therefore, you must allow 
some space for the entry area. (One six-foot 
 person would require an eight-foot-diameter 
igloo.)
 Th e size of the blocks you use is determined 
by your ability to move them into place (at least 
initially). Th e blocks I have used were usually 
about eight inches thick and two and a half feet 
tall on the fi rst row, with smaller sizes following. 
When snow is more brittle (granular; warmer 
conditions), large blocks do not survive the han-
dling well; thus, smaller blocks are used. In most 
situations, I have found that cutting vertical 
blocks is not the best, because as snow falls and 
weather factors in with warming and cooling, 
plus with the varying types of snow, natural lay-
ering will occur. It is between these diff erent types 
of snow that the block will naturally want to sepa-
rate. It has been my experience, meager as it may 
be, that horizontal blocks are often easier to 
quarry successfully. Cut out a rectangular block, 
and cut downward from the surface. Th e fi rst 
block may be wasted, as removing it can be tricky, 
so make it a small one. Th e second block, once it 
is cut from above, can be freed from the snow 
beneath it by sliding the snow knife parallel to the 
surface about eight inches down. I found that 
some natural layering gave me two-inch-thick 
slabs separated by a layer of fl uff y snow. Below 
that were eight-inch slabs. Situations will vary. 
Some people recommend cutting horizontally 
fi rst, then vertically. Th is gives an audible “thunk” 
when the block breaks as the vertical cuts are 
made and the block drops the width of your cut-
ting blade. With a thicker snow knife, like the 
wooden one pictured above, the blocks would 

Wooden snow knife

 To determine, to some degree, the quality of 
the snow in the area you intend to build, slide 
your snow knife into the snow, paying attention 
to the resistance that the snow puts up. Oft en, 
when I’m looking for a good snow cave spot, I fi nd 
great snow, stiff and squeaky, only to slide my 
snow knife in and suddenly feel almost no resis-
tance two or three inches below the surface. Th is 
is great for snow caves but not for cutting blocks 
for igloos. Th e lack of resistance is due to powder 
or granular snow that has not been wind or oth-
erwise packed and will not be suitable for build-
ing as it is. As snow falls, it forms layers; you will 
fi nd some variation in the levels and layers. Some 
are made of hard-packed snow, while others may 
be fi ne or granular and loose. Just because the top 
layer is no good does not mean that the next layer 
down is also inadequate.
 Another way to determine snow quality is to 
cut out a small block and check it out. It should be 
able to withstand some abuse, like dropping on 
the ground with little or no breakage, under 
prime conditions, although igloos can be built 
with borderline fragile snow.

Each occupant should be able to lie down 
without having to bend his or her knees to fi t. Lie 
down and mark your head and feet, then draw a 
circle that encompasses these marks and leave an 

 
 
32 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Snow quarry

break irregularly if I made the horizontal cut 
before cutting from above.
 Most descriptions with which I am familiar 
suggest cutting blocks from inside the igloo area, 
but I have found this to be counterproductive for 
the lone igloo builder for two reasons: (1) by 
removing the fl oor, it can be diffi cult to reach the 
ceiling; and (2) making the sleeping platform and 
the cold sink can be done simultaneously by 
removing part of the fl oor in blocks to create the 
elevated sleeping platform.

Lay a row of blocks around the whole circle. 
Where they butt up against one another will be a 
wedge-shaped void, as only the upper corners will 
touch. Th is void can be eliminated by removing 
the corners with your snow knife, allowing full-
surface contact between all block ends and thus 
providing stronger walls and better insulation. 

Blocks are laid in a spiral pattern, which adds 
strength to the igloo. Th is is easier than building 
concentric tiers of blocks. Six inches above the 
bottom corner of a given block, make a mark. 
From this mark, draw an ascending line to the top 
corner of the fourth block from the mark or about 
one-quarter of the way around the igloo. Cut 
along the line and remove the snow.

For the fi rst two rows, I work from outside the 
igloo, aft er which the inward slope of the wall 
requires me to be inside. Right-handed builders 
will want to spiral up to the right as viewed from 
outside the igloo; left ies will go in the opposite 
direction.
 Th e second row of blocks begins on top of the 
block whose lowest end has just been cut to six 
inches. Prep your blocks by giving a concave cut 
to the bottom and side that will butt up to the 

 
 
 
SHELTER 

33

First row whole, then a line showing snow removed

A bird’s-eye view of a wedge and the correct cut

most recently placed blocks. When they are 
placed on top of the blocks below and butted up 
to the neighboring blocks only the bottom cor-
ners and one top corner will make contact with 
the igloo wall. Th e advantage of this is to elimi-
nate rocking and precariously perched blocks that 
may well set you up for drama later. Once the 
block is in place you can “settle” it by sliding your 
snow knife up and down the vertical joint while 
pushing the blocks together, ever-tightening the 
seam. Th e same can then be done for the horizon-
tal seam. Slide the knife back and forth, and the 
block will settle onto the block below, reducing 
the need for chinking later on. Th e igloo pictured 
is in optimal conditions—no chinking.

Before you begin the third row, the top edge of 
the second row needs to be beveled such that if a 
long spear were lain on it pointing into the igloo, 

Precut block with curve

Settling the block

the point would hit the center of the fl oor. If you 
are building solo, you will need to cut an entry 
hole. Choose a spot, preferably under a large 
block, that will allow you to make an opening that 
is large enough for access but that will not expose 
a seam above. Th is doorway can be enlarged later. 
If you are building with a partner, now is the time 
for one of you to get into the igloo before the wall 
gets too high.

 
 
3 4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Bevel of the top surface of the wall in relation to the center of the shelter

 Th e next set of blocks is be pretrimmed to 
trapezoids, put in place, and adjusted to fi t. It is 
important to angle the blocks inward enough so 
that the shape of the dome is round, not fl at nor 
pointy. Mors Kochanski, author of Bush Craft 
(Lone Pine, 1987), showed me some of what he 
knows about igloos. He explained that new build-
ers tend to construct their igloos like the pointy 
end of an egg, when the goal is the broader end. 
Sure enough, my fi rst igloo looked like the pointy 
end of a stove-in egg. Step out of the igloo periodi-
cally and look at the shape. If it is too pointy, 
Backtrack! Do it right the fi rst time and avoid 
problems later on. It is easy to underestimate the 
friction that quickly becomes a weld between two 
blocks of snow. Th e goal is a dome, and the last 
row of blocks is almost horizontal. Be gentle and 
thin out the blocks to four inches to make them 
more manageable.

Just like a stone archway with its keystone, the 
igloo becomes incredibly strong the moment that 
the “key block” is put in place. Cut the key block 
to the approximate shape, but make it slightly 

larger than the opening. From inside the igloo, 
slide the key block through the opening sideways 
(this is impossible if the opening is truly round; 
don’t worry, it won’t be) and place it over the hole. 
Slide your snow knife up along the edge of the 
opening, trimming the key block on all sides so 
that it settles into place.

It is vital that all holes and cracks be fi lled if 
the igloo is to be eff ective as a shelter. Your skill 
level, the tools at your disposal, and the snow con-
ditions will dictate how much chinking you have 
to do. In warmer areas with wetter snow, the 
cracks can be easily fi lled by packing loose snow 
into them. With more granular snow, it can get 
tricky, because the loose snow won’t pack and will 
stay loose. Th erefore, you have to place any piece 
of snow crust you can fi nd into the openings and 
then wait for the snow to harden—sometimes a 
half hour and other times overnight. In optimal 
conditions, chunks of snow can be cut to fi t each 
hole. When you cut them into wedge-like shapes, 
they can be forced into openings where they will 
immediately weld to the rest of the igloo. Small 

 
 
 
SHELTER 

35

Trimming and installing the last piece

cracks can be smeared over with another block of 
snow to completely windproof the structure. A 
quick look from the inside will light up all of the 
thin areas and holes. Once all the chinks are 
fi lled, smooth the outside of the igloo to a degree 
so that the wind has no edges to work on.
 Th e entry should be perpendicular to prevail-
ing winds (if it is on the lee side, a drift will form 
in the protected area directly in front of the door 
opening) and have the fl oor cut down into the 
snow below, providing space enough to allow you 
to move through hunched over. Walls of snow 
one block high (two feet) can be built on the edge 
of the excavated entry with snow slabs placed 
across it. At the outer end of the entry tunnel, stop 
short of the outside when you are excavating the 
tunnel fl oor so as to leave a small opening to the 
outside world. Skins oft en made the actual door if 
one was used at all and were placed at the entry to 
the tunnel and the igloo living area. I use a snow 
block pushed into place from the inside and keep 
my snow knife in the shelter to aid in my depar-
ture the following morning.
 Th e sleeping platform allows the occupants to 
sleep at a level above that of the highest part of the 
door opening. Th is keeps them in the warmest 
part of the shelter where temperatures can rise 
into the fi ft ies. Th e area next to the sleeping plat-
form is called a cold sink and provides a place for 

Igloo on Rock Lake, Alberta

any cold air entering the igloo to go without hav-
ing any adverse eff ects on the occupants. Th e plat-
form can be created by excavating into the 
snowpack if there is enough snow and removing 
everything that will not comprise the sleeping 
platform. Another option is to build up the plat-
form with snow blocks.

Bedding traditionally consisted of three cari-
bou hides, one fur-side down on the sleeping plat-
form, a second on top of that one, fur-side up, and 
a third as a blanket. Soapstone lamps were used 
for cooking, heating, and lighting inside. Given 
that few people carry three caribou hides in their 
back pockets these days, you will likely use 
boughs from evergreens as an insulating “pad” (I 
use the word very loosely). It has been my experi-
ence that green boughs contain moisture and 
therefore absorb more body heat than dead 
boughs (a nonissue if your clothes are well insu-
lated), so the best choice is the dead material. Of 
course there are exceptions. White pine is far too 
brittle when it is dead to be very comfortable, so 
bunches of pencil-thick sticks have to be used. Or, 
you can go green and enjoy the comfort of the 
fl exible green boughs, although you risk getting 

 
 
3 6 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Cross section of shelter

sticky from the sap. Spruce trees have very stiff , 
sharp needles that fall off of the branch aft er it 
dies, yet the wood retains some fl exibility and in 
such a state makes a fi ne mattress. Grasses, if 
available, are far more comfortable, but they com-
press quickly. In many parks and other public and 

private lands, cutting live trees or boughs is 
against the law; however, do what you must if you 
are in a true survival situation, or make sure that 
harvesting green wood is permitted.

It is of utmost importance that an airhole be 
bored through the upper part of the dome to 

Heating an Igloo

Heat in an igloo seems like an oxymoron, yet tem-

dofﬁ ng gear and luxuriating in the thirty-degree 

peratures of 60°F have been reached and main-

weather. Body heat of the occupants, a candle, or 

tained. The inner wall melts and ices up, while the 

a primitive lamp (see “Stone Lamps” in Chapter 

curve of the dome allows the water to run down 

16) can generate enough heat for the shelter to 

the walls and not fall from the ceiling onto the 

offer a welcome reprieve from the cold wind out-

bed or living area. You do not need to try to attain 

side. Carbon monoxide precludes the use of mod-

such high temperatures, because acclimatization 

ern cooking stoves inside enclosed areas, but a 

needs to be factored in. I can remember being 

well-ventilated area open to the outside can pro-

numb with cold at +45°F in Australia and sweat-

vide enough shelter to allow for the preparation 

ing bullets at 0°F in Montana. So if you step out of 

of meals or hot water while not subjecting the 

the wind in subzero weather and enter an igloo 

cook to the dangers of carbon monoxide.

heated only with an oil lamp, you will ﬁ nd yourself 

 
 
allow fresh air in and stale air out. Carbon diox-
ide will collect in the cold sink or can be vented 
out of a lower vent hole in the cold sink. Th e size 
of the holes that I have used in caves and other 
snow shelters is about two inches in diameter and 
is placed on the lee side of the structure. Check it 
now and then to ensure that it does not get fi lled 
with falling or windblown snow.
 Aft er an igloo has stood in the cold for a few 
hours, it is capable of holding quite some weight. I 
have climbed on mine within a few hours of com-
pleting it and not fallen through. Use your judg-
ment, though, and climb on it just before you 
depart.

DESERT SHELTERS

While I was on the Sonoran Desert one July, I 
measured the temperature on the ground; it was 
136°F. Four feet above the same spot, the temper-
ature was cooler at 121°F. Working at a slow pace 
for about half an hour, I collected enough saguaro 
ribs from the surrounding desert to create a shade 
shelter by leaning them up tipi-style against a 
paloverde tree. Once the hot layer of sand had 
been scraped away, the temperature inside was a 
crisp 93°F!
 Th e value of a bit of shade in which to wait out 
the heat of the day is immeasurable, and while it 
is preferable to build when it is cooler (early morn-
ing or night), many areas provide easy access to 
building materials, making it possible to build in 
the heat of the day without overtaxing the healthy 
survivalist. Conversely, many areas have very lit-
tle with which to build; it is, aft er all, a desert. It 
also must be noted that deserts, when compared 
to most nondesert environments, are, for the most 

SHELTER 

37

part, uninhabited. Or, more precisely, the fl ora 
and fauna are oft en much smaller and/or fewer 
and farther between. Th is is not to say that long-
term survival within a desert is impossible, merely 
that it requires a somewhat more refi ned set of 
skills and off ers fewer choices in everything from 
diet to shelter type and location. When I’m at 
places like the Kelso Dunes in the Mojave Desert, 
I see no point in constructing a shelter. Sure, I 
could dig a pit shelter, support it with dead wood 
(not abundant in the dunes), and then laboriously 
trek out to find water at one of the seasonal 
springs. Blacktail jackrabbits are plentiful, as evi-
denced by many tracks and the number of kit fox 
kills found in the few tree islands visible from 
most spots on the dunes, indicating a source of 
food. However, the work involved in residing in 
such a place can be overly taxing to the human 
body.
 Th ere are exceptions of course. Along rivers 
there is oft en plenty of vegetation with which to 
build a shelter, but you will have to be creative and 
versatile. Take note as you move along where 
water sources are, if there are any, and whether 
they’re seasonal or reliable year-round. Pay atten-
tion to where shelter building locations might be 
good. If you spend a lot of time outdoors, you will 
get pretty good at noting items and their locations 
that could save your life as you move through the 
landscape. Talk to locals, rangers, and other peo-
ple who spend a lot of time outdoors in the area. 
Cars break down, ankles twist, and help may be a 
long time coming if you are not prepared. A case 
in point:
 While driving in Australia’s western deserts 
one Sunday night, I was startled by an aboriginal 
fellow who dashed out of the bush into the road 
waving his arms. I had little choice but to stop 
and, aft er inquiring about his health, was told that 

 
3 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

his family had been traveling to a friend’s place 
when they got a fl at tire early in the morning. 
Having no jack with which to lift the car, they had 
unsuccessfully attempted to dig a hollow beneath 
the defl ated tire. Th e family, which included a 
toddler and two older children, had spent the day 
sitting in the desert near their car. Rather than 
lamenting their situation, they had a large shade 
cloth strung up and a fi re going and were quite at 
their ease, ready and prepared to remain the 
night. A few minutes with my jack and they were 
on their way. Th ey were prepared in one way, but 
not in another.
 Th e deserts I have experienced, while having 
some characteristic that defines them to the 
through traveler (the saguaro cacti of the Sonoran 
Desert, for example, or the Joshua tree of the 
Mojave Desert), are really quite varied in their 
diversity and terrain. Th is means that one valley 
may have plenty of shelter material and the valley 
over the next rise may have none. Understand 
this: Th ere are no hard and fast recipes for sur-
vival in the desert; there are wise and rather gen-
eral guidelines that in most cases will help you 
last longer than you would if you went blindly 
traipsing off in some random direction, hoping to 
stumble upon a man with air-conditioning and a 
glass of cold water. It is easy to tell you to stay cool, 
stay hydrated, and keep out of the sun. Yet what 
are those words worth if they are not fl eshed out 
with more specifi c advice and practice?

Shade Shelters

Shade shelters are great when you wish to sit out 
the heat of the day either as a pause in your trek-
king or while you wait for rescue. I once fell asleep 
at seven thousand feet in the Utah sun while 

wearing shorts. Temperatures were cool, but I was 
beet red and hurting when I fi nally awoke. If you 
fi nd yourself needing such a shelter in the cooler 
part of the day, great! Build even if you expect to 
be rescued prior to needing it. Not only does it 
give you something to do, which is good for 
morale, it also helps you preserve yourself. If you 
are already in the high heat, look for existing 
shade or a situation that will require minimal 
modifi cations to make it suitable. Th ese modifi -
cations can be as simple as hanging a blanket or 
placing some brush or branches against a rocky 
outcrop or shrub. Th e goal is to expend as little 
energy as possible and minimize water loss 
through sweating.

First, of course, you must locate a site. I look 
for something that already provides some shade, 
like a plant or rock structure. Remember, if you 
are in the midday heat and you need to build a 
shelter, think before you act; wandering around 
looking for the perfect situation will waste water, 
energy, and potentially your life. Do not mess 
around. Get the shelter up, get out of the sun, and 
rest! Improvements can be made later when it 
cools off .
 Next, clear debris out of the area that will 
make up the interior. Do this carefully with your 
feet, or better yet, use a stick. I have been stung by 
scorpions doing this with my bare hands. In 
severe heat, this step should wait until the materi-
als for the shelter have been gathered to avoid 
heating the newly exposed ground.
 Collect materials—anything that will keep the 
sun from getting to you and that you can place, 
lean, or otherwise suspend will suffi ce. Again, be 
cautious when you’re collecting wood or vegeta-
tion, as local venomous inhabitants may be a little 
miff ed at being unceremoniously evicted. If I have 

 
 
SHELTER 

39

Wikiups and Brush Shelters

Th e wikiup is, quite simply, a conical skeleton of 
sticks and sotol (similar to yucca) or saguaro ribs 
with a thatchlike covering of grasses or leafy 
branches. (See Chapter 7 for more on thatched 
structures.) More weatherproof than the shade 
shelter, the wikiup is a better shelter for extended 
stays in desert areas, although it can be used in 
other climates. While it takes more work to con-
struct than a brush shelter, it will last longer and 
will usually provide better protection. Size is dic-
tated by your needs and the availability of materi-
als. For one person, a small shelter about fi ve feet 
high with a four-foot diameter can do the trick, 
although there is value to the ability to fully 
stretch out for a restful sleep. As the shelters get 
bigger, they require longer skeleton poles—a “tall” 
order in some areas. It has been my experience 
that, for a group, it is easier to build a few smaller 
shelters than one large one.
 To build a wickiup:

1. Create a tripod with three sturdy sticks; if 
a forked stick can be found, use it and lay 
the other two in the fork, then spread the 
bases out to form an equilateral triangle. 
Keep in mind that the steeper the pitch, 
the better the shelter will shed rain. If no 
forked sticks are available, I like to pound 
a yucca leaf, as if I were preparing it for 
cordage (see Chapter 15), then I use it as a 
tie to lash the poles together. David Allo-
way takes it a step further in his book Des-
ert Survival Skills, where he mentions pita, 
a fl exible and strong material for lashing 
made by heating the yucca leaf in prepara-
tion for tying. I have tried it and found it 

Shade shelter, Sonoran Desert

boots on, I’ll give wood a good kick to jog loose 
any scorpions or spiders; otherwise, I’ll use a stick 
to give it a rap. Grasses and leafy branches also get 
the stick rustled through them. Whether you opt 
to build the shelter as you collect each piece of 
material, or you make a big pile of supplies then 
build it all at once, is up to you.

Stack the materials against the tree, shrub, 
rock, or what have you, and keep adding them 
until no sun spots remain on the fl oor of the shel-
ter. If the ground inside is hot, scrape it out or put 
something else in on which to sit. Remember the 
object? Keeping cool.
 Th e entrance ought not to face west. I prefer 
facing to the east, because the sun can take off the 
night’s chill fi rst thing, and by the time it starts to 
get really hot, the sun is too high to shine into the 
shelter. Using an awning or having the door to the 
north can also reduce the time the sun has access 
to the shelter.
 Th is shelter is not set up to be waterproof, 
although it will shed diff ering amounts of rain 
depending on what materials were used and how 
exactly it was constructed.

 
 
 
4 0 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Frame for a wikiup

comparable to beating the leaf, but if a fi re 
is safely and easily produced, it is faster.
2. Dig the butts of the poles into the ground 
about six inches if it’s not too hard, or 
brace rocks against the outside of each of 
the three main poles. I have built these 
without digging in or using rocks to 
anchor the structure with no ill eff ects. 
However, if you want to sleep well in areas 
prone to high winds, it is advisable to use 
one or both techniques; all it takes is a 
quick downburst to flip over a small 
shelter.

3. Add poles between those of the tripod. I 
prefer to space them about an arm’s length 
apart (about two feet) at the base. Do not 
allow the support poles to extend more 
than six inches beyond the top of the shel-
ter. Rain will hit them and will run down 
inside, dripping at various points between 
the top and the bottom.

4. Gather long, fl exible branches of willow 
or, in a pinch, use cottonwood. Cotton-
wood breaks more easily and needs baby-
ing. Lash these pieces horizontally around 
the poles. Th e fi rst row should be about 
eighteen inches above the ground (if mate-
rials are readily available, I like to have a 
ground-level row as well, because it keeps 
the more fl exible coverings from sagging 
into the shelter), and each row thereaft er 
should be the same distance above the 
previous row. Th is distance really hinges 
upon the length of the materials you have 
available for thatching. I make the dis-
tance two-thirds to three-fourths of the 
length of my thatch, which allows for 
decent overlap.

5. Gather thatching materials, grasses, or 
leafy branches, and form them into bun-
dles that can be just grasped with one 
hand. Th e stems or thick ends are oriented 

 
 
 
 
 
SHELTER 

41

Wickiup

upward with the tops pointing at the 
ground when they are in place on the 
shelter.

6. Using willow shoots or yucca leaves 
(pounded as for cordage), tie on the thatch 
bundles tightly in next to each other, start-
ing on the bottom level. When the entire 
lower rung has been thatched, minus an 
area for the door, move up to the next 
rung, and so on, until you are done.

• 

• 

Tie cordage around the pole, leaving a tail 
where you want any water that has managed 
to infi ltrate the thatch to drip. Much of it will 
run down the poles, hit the cordage, and run 
down the tail and drop.
Wad up any grasses or plant matter you can 
fi nd and wedge it in the gaps where the poles 
meet.

Brush shelters, and I use the word “shelter” 
loosely, are very similar to shade shelters and 

In desert areas, torrential downpours do 
occur no matter how short-lived they are, but 
things tend to dry out pretty quickly. (I have had 
bedsheets dry before I could get the second 
clothespin to hold it on the line and jeans bone 
dry even in the darkest recesses of the watch 
pocket in fi ft een minutes.) However, if you want 
to go for a watertight shelter, the top can be tough. 
Here are some tips to help reduce the amount of 
water that will get in:

Cordage rain drip

 
 
 
 
42 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

wikiups but much more crude in their construc-
tion and used where organic matter is scarce and 
less substantial (no trees, primarily sparse scrub). 
A short-term, expedient way to get out of the sun, 
they are merely a few sticks balanced against each 
other, leaning in forks or simply tied with some 
cordage or pounded yucca leaf. Brush and grass 

are then thrown on the sunward side and over the 
top. Not much attention to detail with these; the 
goal is just to create some shade. Wind can be an 
issue depending on your location, the time of 
year, and the local weather, so keep off of south-
ern slopes and on the leeward side of slopes, boul-
ders, or other windbreaks.

More Tips on Shelters

•

With heat, even cold-weather shelters can be 

ﬁ re. A debris hut properly constructed will 

made ﬁ t for kings. Rocks heated in a ﬁ re can 

keep you warm and dry with no ﬁ re. If you’re 

be buried in the ground within your shelter, 

sick, you do not need to gather wood to stay 

and as long as they are sufﬁ ciently buried 

warm; you can sleep through the night with-

(four to six inches), you should have a cozy 

out having to wake and tend the ﬁ re. You can 

night with the ground still toasty in the morn-

stay in the same location and not have to 

ing. If you shift around a lot in the night and 

worry about the wood supply as much, 

have buried your hot rocks too shallowly, you 

because you only need ﬁ re for cooking and 

may suffer a burn or a ﬁ re. Be careful.

working. A lean-to, however, makes a great 

•

Sometimes damp or cold areas cannot be 

work area, whereas a debris hut by itself is 

avoided, and sleeping on the ground is not 

really just a sleeping bag. Weigh your options 

desirable. Such was the case while I was on a 

and think through your shelter decisions.

training exercise with my unit and the slow 

•

If you make primitive shelters, then you 

will

soldiers to arrive at the platoon tent were left 

have failures! The key is to practice before you 

with a puddle in which to sleep. This was not 

need the shelter so that when do, you can 

appealing but was quickly remedied with a 

build one correctly and without hesitation. 

load of kindling wood from the pile outside 

Learn why you failed, think through the path 

the tent. In such instances, making a “mat-

the water took from the outside into your shel-

tress” of sticks or boughs can provide enough 

ter, or how the wind managed to ﬁ ll it with 

separation from the offending surface.

smoke from your ﬁ re. Understanding these 

•

Think about the energy required to construct 

lessons is what makes the difference in the 

and maintain the shelter and its heat source. A 

ﬁ eld.

lean-to may seem like a good idea, but it 

•

Remember the “Six

Ps: Proper Planning and 

requires a tarp or, missing that, almost as 

Practice Prevent Poor Performance.” If you 

much work as a debris hut. It also requires a 

really want to know these skills, then do them!

 
C H A P T E R 3

WATER

Water is a high priority for life. It’s what scien-

tists at NASA search for in their quest for life on 
other planets. Without it, we will begin to fade in 
two or three days, when, debilitated by dehydra-
tion, our mind will swim as our head pounds and 
our tongue, thick and sticky, begs our salivary 
glands to produce a drop of precious moisture. 
With a failing ability to make sense of our world 
as hallucinations play out in our thirsty mind, we 
will fall and perish. Th is happens. Sometimes the 
body is found with water in a container. Why? 
Rationing water is not always the best option, nor 
is fooling your body with the pebble under the 
tongue. Th e best action to take in any environ-
ment, desert or otherwise, is to drink water. Store 
water in your belly where it is available for use as 
needed. I have been so parched at times that when 
I fi nally drank, I swear the fi rst gulp was absorbed 
by my mouth before it could hit my stomach. Liq-
uids are utilized by the body to fl ush out the sys-
tem. When we urinate and the smell is strong and 
the color dark, the waste-to-water ratio is off ; a 
higher percentage of waste in our urine makes it 
darker and more odoriferous. Th e two primary 
reasons for this are illness and dehydration. Use 
this as a message telling you to drink more water 
and slow the water loss from your body.

FINDING WATER

If you were thirsty while out in the wild, where 
would you fi nd a drink? In most places, it is too 
easy to become sick from drinking polluted water; 
therefore, it is very important to find a clean 
source of liquid or a reliable purifi cation system.
 You need water now; where can it be found? 
In order to answer this question, let’s look at a few 
simple rules that water follows.

• 
• 
• 

• 

 it evaporates.

It runs downhill.
If exposed to heat,
It comes to the surface via precipitation, or 
springs.
It remains on the surface if the material below 
is nonpermeable and/or new water arrives 
faster than, or as fast as, water leaves.

 Next time you are on a walk or hike, see if you 
can describe where the water goes when it rains in 
your specifi c location. Is the soil absorbent? How 
long must it rain for water to run off and form 
rivulets? Once the rain stops, where could you 
fi nd catchments, and how long would the water 
remain in them? Th ese are just some of the ques-
tions you want to have in your consciousness as 

43

4 4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

you keep an eye out for water. When I was on the 
Sonoran and Mojave deserts, I looked for water 
sans map and quickly realized that country this 
big does not aff ord the uninformed many second 
chances. So, before you head across the valley to 
the far ridge in search of water, you may want to 
see some evidence of a water source.

Sometimes water sources are obvious, such as 
a patch of brightly colored greenery when all 
around it is only dull tans and muted greens. 
Other times, the spring or catchment is in a ravine 
hidden in some nook and cannot be seen from 
more than a few feet away. A small consolation in 
this area, however, is that it can be smelled for a 
long way or, more accurately, the rotting vegeta-
tion in it can be smelled. Th e downside is that 
sometimes all you can fi nd is a rank, soggy patch 
of ground. One of the reasons why deserts pose 
the risks to the traveler that they do is because sel-
dom can a spring be recognized from any great 
distance. Additionally, some “springs” are not 
springs at all, but catchments, where water col-
lects aft er running off surrounding rocks that 
have also fi lled with sand and gravel. Some of 
these basins have one or more exit points at or 
near the surface where, if they contain water, it 
can be seen seeping or trickling out. Such subter-
ranean basins may hold anywhere from a few 
cups to thousands of gallons and may drain in a 
few days or over the course of months.

Just because a map shows a spring, stream, or 
other water source at a certain location does not 
mean that it is a reliable water source. Nor does 
the lack of a marked water source mean that no 
water is to be had. I have had the pleasure of 
drinking from desert springs that were so con-
stant, nettles grew around them. I have also had 
the lesson of thirst aft er reaching a spring that 
had nothing to off er. But counting on a spring to 

refi ll your water containers because it is marked 
on a map is not wise. If you want to travel through 
unfamiliar terrain, desert or otherwise, check 
maps, talk to local authorities, or, if you are plan-
ning a group trek, go scout out some of the water 
sources you want to visit on your trip. Be safe 
when you can, and push the envelope only when 
you have to.

PURIFYING WATER

Streams, ponds, and other surface water may be 
dangerous to drink untreated. Filters to remove 
sediment and other larger debris can be made 
with grass, charcoal, and sand, but boiling is what 
ensures that water is safe to drink. According to 
the National Ski Patrol, water needs only to be 
brought to a boil in order to kill almost all harm-
ful viruses, protozoa, and bacteria. At elevations 
from sea level to 6,500 feet, the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention advises bringing 
water to a rolling boil for one minute, then allow-
ing it to cool to ambient temperature. Above 6,500 
feet, it is suggested that the water maintain a roll-
ing boil for three minutes. (See “Rock Boiling” in 
Chapter 9.) If you must drink untreated water 
from a stream, do so from an area that has a good, 
steady fl ow, such as from near the bottom of rap-
ids or riffl es.

SPRINGS

Springs come in many forms. I have found seeps 
to be the most common. Oft en only a small, moist 
area, they can be dug out into a shallow depres-

 
 
 
WAT ER 

45

sion and allowed to fi ll. Once the sediment has 
settled, water can be collected. Sometimes the 
only sign of a seep is a patch of green moss or veg-
etation that is thicker than the surrounding area. 
Other times, insect activity can be the clue that 
tips you off .

In the Southeast, I have found hillsides where 
holes the size of quarters spout clean water in wet 
times and seep in dry times. A local man showed 
me that, by folding a rhododendron leaf length-
wise into a U shape (with the stem and midrib 
making the bottom of the U) and sticking it into a 
hillside seep, clean water soon runs down the leaf, 
providing an easy drink. Some springs are 
extreme, like fossil springs in Arizona. Th ere, 
holes that a man can fi t into gush drinkable water 
out of the ground at such a rate that it is almost 
impossible to force your body in against the 
current.

DIGGING

Digging is sometimes the best way of securing 
water. Th ere are a number of situations in which 
making a shallow hole (seep hole) and allowing it 
to fi ll with water is the easiest option. Even though 
the ground is a great fi lter, boiling is still advised.

• 

In dry creek beds, water can be just below the 
surface. Good places to dig are on the inside 
of bends where the water has cut deepest into 
the bank and can form a pocket that holds 
water. You will, however, have to dig through 
the sand and gravel that has also collected 
there. Th e bases of cliff s with plenty of green-
ery like cattails and areas with wetland trees 
(willows, basswoods, cottonwoods, and syca-

A riverbed showing dig areas

mores, to name a few) are generally good 
places to investigate for water.
In deserts, such wetland trees may take up 
water in the early hours of the day and release 
it only once the cool of early evening has 
come. Pay attention to areas that look as if 
they have held water recently, because water 
may still be close to the surface. Additionally, 
as the tree releases the water, then you may 
not have to dig at all, as the level can rise above 
grade. Craig Childs mentions in his book, Th e 
Secret Knowledge of Water (Back Bay Books, 
2000), streams that fl owed only at night and 
disappeared with the rising sun.
Near swamps, lakes, or moving water, digging 
a seep hole and allowing the nearby swamp 
water to seep in is a good way to acquire some-
what fi ltered water.
Along the coast, where salt water is abundant 
and fresh water is harder to fi nd, dig a seep 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
4 6 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 

hole that is well inland from the high-tide line 
(at least one dune inland). Low-lying areas 
with plenty of vegetation are prime locations. 
In sandy ground with little vegetation, the 
hole must either be lined with whatever is on 
hand or dug to such a width that the collaps-
ing sand near the edges does not aff ect the 
middle of the seep.
Coyotes and other animals will also dig holes 
for water, and you can use the holes for water 
collection. If you have the luxury of being 
squeamish, these holes can at least serve as 
indicators of where to dig your own hole and 
how deep it will have to be. Th is is not an auto-
matic water source. I know people who have 
made concerted eff orts to dig such wells with-
out success. Mark Elbroch, a tracker and 
friend, fi rst found coyote-dug wells in eastern 
Massachusetts while collecting data for his 
book, Mammal Tracks & Sign (Stackpole 
Books, 2003).

DEW GATHERING AND CATCHMENTS

Dew does not always fall and should not be 
counted on as a reliable way to replenish your 
water supply. However, there are times when dew-
collecting techniques would benefi t you, espe-
cially if you currently or soon expect to need 
water and this source is available to you.
 Clothing can be used to soak up dew by drag-
ging it or brushing it over grasses and then wring-
ing it out into a container. Let the water stand, 
skim off anything fl oating on the surface, and 
carefully pour off the water without disturbing 
any sediment on the bottom. At this point, the 
water may look clean, but boiling it is still a good 

idea. Dew is only as clean as what it touches; 
therefore, if you use your T-shirt, it will impart its 
own fl avor to your drink.
 Catchments can be made from bark or cloth-
ing to secure rainwater. Tarps, ponchos, and other 
waterproof items can be used as a funnel, i.e., a 
large surface to catch raindrops and direct them 
to a container. Absorbent material can be used to 
catch and hold water and then be wrung out and 
treated.

SOLAR STILLS

Th e purpose of a solar still is to promote evapora-
tion of moisture, condense water vapor, and col-
lect the drinkable product. I must say that, as a 
survival tool, the solar still is greatly overrated. I 
have set up stills from the northeastern United 
States to the Sonoran, Mojave, and Great Basin 
deserts. Th e Sonoran and Mojave typically gave 
me next to nothing aft er twenty-four hours, while 
the Great Basin provided somewhere between 
nothing and barely enough to cover the bottom of 
a two-cup measuring cup. Th e most I have ever 
gotten from a solar still, even with adding cactus 
pulp, urine, and foul water, was about one-half 
cup in twenty-four hours. I could have collected 
more with a larger still, but how much plastic is 
one to carry, and how much digging can be 
expected of a dehydrated person in the desert? 
Given the amount of work required to install a 
still (even with a shovel), the materials you must 
have with you for it, and the fact that you must 
stay put for some time before you can hope to gain 
any benefi t from it, I recommend making great 
preparations to avoid a situation that might have 
you killing yourself in an eff ort to make solar 

 
WAT ER 

47

 When the sun strikes the still, the air and the 
dirt inside heat up, causing any moisture in the 
soil to evaporate. Th e rising water vapor hits the 
plastic and condenses. Running down the plastic 
to the rock, it drips into the water container. 
When you are thirsty, you must open the still in 
order to retrieve the water.

For the deluxe model, lay one end of the tub-
ing inside the water container, hammer a stake 
into the bottom of the hole, and tie the tubing to 
it; this will prevent accidental removal of the tube. 
Make sure that the tubing extends from the water 
container to beyond the edge of the plastic sheet. 
It is a good idea to carve a cork or otherwise pro-
tect the upper end of the tube to prevent debris 
and/or critters from entering. Finish the still as 
above. To drink, simply remove the cork and suck 
on the tubing.

In dry climates, green plant matter, foul water, 
salt water, or urine can be put inside the still (be 
careful not to contaminate your drinking tube or 
water container) either directly on the bottom of 
the hole or in a container of their own. When the 
moisture evaporates, it leaves behind any impuri-
ties, providing you with clean drinking water.

The Quick Still or Transpiration Bag

Th e quick still requires one plastic bag, a pebble, 
and bit of cordage.
 Th e bag is placed over the end of a branch 
with green leaves and is exposed to the sun. A 
pebble is placed in one corner to create a low spot, 
or the bag can usually be manipulated to do the 
same sans pebble. Th e bag is tied shut, blocking 
any fl ow of air in or out of the bag. 
 Water will evaporate out of the leaves, con-
dense on the bag, and run down to the low spot. 
To improve this slightly, more green matter (slices 

Solar still cross section

stills. Th at said, here is how they are typically 
made.

Pit Stills

You will need one piece of plastic that is sixty 
inches by sixty inches, a wide-mouthed water 
container, a digging stick (see Chapter 16), an egg-
sized rock, and, for the deluxe model, a thirty-
inch piece of fl exible tubing and a stopper or cork 
to fi t it.

In a spot receiving maximum sunlight, dig a 
hole that is thirty or more inches in diameter and 
about twenty or more inches deep. Put the soil 
from the hole in a pile nearby and run the digging 
stick around the rim of the hole to knock free any 
loose soil. In some areas there is a layer of fi ne 
dust a few inches thick on the surface that should 
scraped away from the edge of the hole. Place the 
water container in the middle of the hole. Place 
the plastic over the hole and weigh down the four 
corners with stones or handfuls of earth. Place 
the egg-sized rock in the center of the plastic and 
move the corners in toward the hole until the rock 
hangs about ten inches below grade. Cover the 
edge of the plastic sheet completely, using soil 
removed from the hole, and pack it down.

 
 
 
 
4 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

the pebble up, allowing the water to run out of the 
bag and into a water container. Be warned that 
the water collected in this manner is actually tea 
and, depending on the taste of the plant, can be 
quite nasty to drink.

I have found clear plastic to be more eff ective 
in making stills than black plastic. I believe that 
this is a result of the sun being able to pass 
through the clear plastic and heat the soil 
directly—something not possible with black 
plastic.

Transpiration bag

of cactus, grass, etc.) can be draped over the 
branch prior to covering with the bag. To collect 
the water, untie the bag and tilt the low spot with 

In the spring and fall, during times when it freezes 
at night and warms up during the day, sap is run-

SAP GATHERING

Barrel Cactus

The barrel cactus of spaghetti western fame is 

often touted as a barrel of water just waiting for 

someone to shove a spigot through its wall and 

turn it on. I can tell you from ﬁ rsthand experience 

that the barrel cactus is full of moist pulp, and the 

deeper you dig within it, the wetter it gets. I can 

also tell you that the liquid so readily available (at 

least once you get the top of the cactus off, which 

is a challenge with anything but a chainsaw) is 

more likely to make you vomit up valuable liquid 

than it is to quench your thirst. In an emergency, if 

a commercial ﬁ lter was available, you could get 

valuable liquid from these long-lived cacti; other-

wise they should be left alone and admired from 

the outside.

Barrel cactus and pulp

 
 
WAT ER 

49

ning in the trees, and it is possible to collect more 
than a gallon of sap a day from a single tree by 
tapping it. Late-fall tapping of trees can be done, 
although the sap output in the fall is about half of 
what it is in the spring and, in the case of the sugar 
maple, with considerably less sugar content. Fresh 
sap from some trees is delicious and safe to 
drink.
 Any of the maple, walnut, and black birch 
trees can be tapped in the following manner:

1. On the side of the tree that is exposed to 
the sun, carve, chop, or abrade a vertical 
channel through the bark and into the 
cambium layer (green wood).

2. At the bottom, bore a hole that is deep 
enough to hold a twig or stick in such a 
way that it slopes gently downward.

3. Add channels radiating out from the cen-

ter channel at an upward angle.

4. Place a container at the base of the tree, 
under the lower end of the stick, to catch 
the sap.

Tree tap

 As the sap moves in the tree, it will fl ow into 
the grooves and into the central channel. From 
there, it will move to the twig, where it will drip 
off the end into the collecting container.

Boiling the sap down will give you ever thicker 
and sweeter syrup as the water evaporates, leav-
ing behind the sugars and other flavors. The 
unboiled sap, however, is quite delicious and safe 
to drink. Forty gallons of sugar maple sap will 
provide one gallon of syrup—twice that is 
required for birch.
 Grapevines can be cut and the sap collected 
in the spring and fall in the method described 
below:

1. Cut a grapevine three feet above the 

ground.

2. Bend the vine over, and, if necessary, tie it 
so that the fast-dripping sap falls into a 
container.

3. Recut the end of the vine every day or so 
to maintain a fl ow. Otherwise the plant 
will heal enough to stop the f low 
altogether.

If you try this when the sap is no longer 
 running, all you will get for your eff orts is some 
clear jelly, something for which I have as yet found 
no use.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 4

FIR E

Heat is applied to dry wood or tinder. At around 

300°F, it begins to smoke as some of the cellulose 
begins to decompose, and it emits oft en visible, 
volatile gases. Th e wood left behind is converted 
to charcoal and ash, the former being almost pure 
carbon and the latter being the unburnable min-
erals contained in the wood. As the temperature 
rises to about 500°F, the gases combust and, as 
long as there is a supply of fuel to continue this 
process, a fi re will burn.
 Th e trick is in applying heat to wood or tinder, 
usually by one of these approaches:

• 

• 

Through direct application of something 
already alight or exceptionally hot, such as 
rocks pulled from a fi re, or focusing sunlight 
with a magnifi er of some sort. (When I was 
grinding acorns to fl our, I smelled something 
burning and discovered that the sun was 
being refl ected, satellite-dish style, off of the 
inside wall of the metal bowl containing the 
fl our and had actually ignited the fl our.)
By converting energy from your body through 
motion to friction between two woody mate-
rials, thus generating heat that is simultane-
ously transferred to small particles of wood 
pulled from their parent pieces and deposited 

in a specifi c location. Here, they glom together 
and burn fl amelessly in the form of a coal.

 Th e simple goal with a fi re is to have dry fuel 
balanced with oxygen. Too much of one can pre-
vent the desired result or at best make for a very 
ineffi cient fi re.
 Th e methods in this chapter are generally well 
suited to short-term survival situations. For more 
advanced fi re-making skills suitable to long-term 
wilderness living, see Chapter 8.

MATERIALS

Th e following components are needed to build a 
fi re:

• 

Tinder. 
True tinder consists of any dry, thin, 
fl ammable material that, when nested around 
a coal, can be blown into a fl ame. Some kinds 
of tinder are: the outer bark of red cedars; the 
inner bark of any dead poplar, basswood, or 
maple tree; dry grasses; cattail down; cotton-
wood cotton; and milkweed fi bers and down. 
Dead agave stalks make great coal carriers, as 

51

52 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 

• 

First wood. 
First wood should be from pencil 
thickness to wrist thickness and helps ignite 
the fi rewood.
Firewood. 
Finally, fi rewood is wrist thickness 
and larger and is used to keep a fi re burning 
for extended periods of time.

 Dry wood burns far better than wet or green 
wood and is necessary for starting fi res. Wood on 
the ground tends to absorb moisture, so try to use 
dead branches from trees, alive or dead, that are 
still standing. Check with local authorities about 
regulations regarding the harvesting of wood. 
Even during wet weather, branches on trees are 
surrounded by air and dried by the wind. Even if 
the branches are wet on the outside, the insides 
are usually dry. If you are in doubt, break a piece 
of wood. If it snaps in two without much bending, 
it should be good.
 A broken branch can be held against the 
upper lip, which is very sensitive to moisture, as 
another “dry test.” When you are collecting fi re-
wood, keep in mind that it is not necessary to 
break it all into eighteen-inch lengths. Let the fi re 
work for you and burn longer logs in half. Cau-
tion: be very aware of fi re danger in your area, 
and be sure to keep fi re contained within your 
fi re pit.

TIPI FIRES

How do you build a fi re that can be lit with only 
one match or a coal in any weather? A fi re built 
in the form of a tipi is the best design for this 
task. A well-built tipi fi re can burn with no atten-
tion for extended periods of time, because as it 
burns, it collapses inward, thus feeding itself. In 

Fuels and a ﬁ re set

their inner “wood” becomes incredibly soft 
and can almost be lit with fl int and steel. Tin-
der fungus, found on birch trees, can be bro-
ken or cut open and the pithy inner material 
used as tinder (it works best when it is live, 
although if it is dried slowly it can still be 
used). Th ese are all good for your tinder bun-
dle. Th e downy materials mentioned, as well 
as polypore (a type of shelf fungus oft en found 
on trees or rotting logs), are good additives 
but do not make very good tinder on their 
own. Th e other tinders should be buff ed or 
rubbed briskly between the hands to separate 
the fi bers. Th is promotes brisk burning when 
the tinder is ignited.

Some tinder requires a fl ame, as opposed 
to a coal, in order to ignite. So-called “fl ame 
tinders” include dry pine needles (which can 
also be used with a coal in a pinch), birch bark, 
freshly dried strips of pine bark cambium, the 
smallest of branches, and other woody mate-
rials. Dead hemlock branch ends are also 
superb, as well as dried flood debris from 
along streams.
Kindling. 
Th in, dry branches and plant stalks 
up to pencil thickness make great kindling to 
get the fi re going.

• 

 
 
wet weather, the wood making up the tipi fi re 
begins drying the moment the tinder is ignited, 
because as the heat rises, it passes around the 
wood. In addition, the outer fi rewood protects 
the fl ame from severe weather, be it snow, rain, 
or wind.
 To build a tipi fi re, take a handful of twelve-
inch-long fi re tinder and kindling in both hands, 
thumbs down, and bend or break them in the 
middle (they need not separate). Place them in 
your fi re pit and form them into a rough tipi or 
triangular shape while using your thumbs to 
ensure that a doorway and open area are inside 
for the tinder. Face the opening to the wind to 
help spread the fi re into the tipi. Next, lay on more 
kindling and fi rst wood, starting with smaller 
pieces and building up until you have a tipi of a 
size required for your needs. Practice making 
fi res of diff erent sizes in a safe location, such as a 
riverbed, to determine what size is adequate for 
your various needs. Set aside some wood of all 
sizes, and cover your door once the tinder is lit 
and placed inside. If you are using a coal to start 
your fi re, you can either ignite your tinder and 
place it in the tipi or place the smoking tinder 
bundle into the tipi just prior to ignition, then 
give it a fi nal breath of air once it is in place. Now 
just cover the door and sit back. Th e fi re should 
need no tinkering for some time.

FIRE PITS AND RINGS

Fire pits serve a number of purposes and to vary-
ing degrees. Some pits are no more than a simple 
ring of rocks, while others are more elaborate 
with drying racks, an oven, and frying rocks.
 What is the purpose of fi re pits?

FIR E 

53

Common Mistakes to Avoid

•

Many times, I have watched people build tiny 

ﬁ res in the rain, light their birch bark, and wait 

to see if the wood will catch. Then, when it 

looks promising, they furiously add more 

wood, only to have the ﬁ re die. The recently 

added wood did not have enough time in the 

heat to dry to the point of combustion. Build 

the entire tipi and then light it!

•

Some people spend a lot of time painstakingly 

building their tipi as if to enter it in a beauty 

contest. After you have built a few, construc-

tion should take no more than thirty seconds 

to one minute if you have already collected 

the materials.

•

A huge cavity, or “door,” and a little bit of tin-

der result in the tinder burning up and the 

ﬂ ames hardly touching the kindling or ﬁ rst 

wood. Whereas . . .

•

Packing your tinder too tightly into the tipi will 

not allow the ﬂ ame to spread well and often 

ends with a little whiff of smoke and no heat. 

Therefore, your tinder should be ﬂ uffed to ﬁ ll 

the space evenly and just come in contact with 

the tipi structure.

• 

• 

• 

Th ey contain the fi re by providing an unburn-
able barrier between the fi re and other com-
bustible materials around the fire, such as 
shelters, duff , grasses, leaves, etc.
Th ey help the fi re burn evenly due to wind 
protection as well as concentrate the heat and 
light by refl ecting them back into the fi re.
Th ey help us direct fi re for specifi c uses such 
as cooking in diff erent ways (roasting, frying, 
baking), drying foods, and making tools (for 

 
5 4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

example, burning logs down to a size that is 
suitable for ax handles or fi re-hardening a 
spear point and tips for digging sticks).

 To make a basic fi re pit, dig into the ground to 
a depth of about six inches, and form it like a half 
sphere, with the excavated dirt acting as a fi re 
ring and refl ector around the pit. Th is pit acts 
something like a satellite dish and refl ects the 
light and heat up above the fi re. Fire pits lined 
with rocks will hold heat longer and will protect 
against fi re leaving the fi re area.
 A fi re ring is quite simply a ring of stone to 
contain fi re and provide minimal wind protec-
tion. A word of caution on stones and fire: 
although I regularly use stones directly from the 
stream for heating in fi res, it must be noted that 

small cavities within the rock can slowly, over the 
years, acquire moisture; when heated, this water 
will boil, oft en resulting in the rock breaking, 
usually with a small creak or pop. Some rocks, 
however (quartz in particular), will explode with 
quite some force and should be avoided.
 Th e keyhole pit is one of the more versatile 
pits I have used. Dug in the shape of an old- 
fashioned keyhole, this pit allows for all kinds of 
cooking.
 Th e round portion is good for general use, like 
working tools, providing light and heat, and 
cooking fi sh and ashcakes. (Ashcakes are a dough 
of fl our and water, spread into a round disk. Ber-
ries are added in the middle, and then the dough 
is folded in half and pinched shut, closing the 
 berries inside. Th is ashcake is then placed in the 

Fire pit with extras

 
FIR E 

55

hot ashes near the coals to cook. Th e ash acts as a 
leavening agent and can be blown off the ashcake 
once cooked.)
 Th e box or smaller rectangular section can be 
used for a variety of tasks. For roasting, use Y 
sticks on either side to hold a spit. A rock can be 
placed over the top, heated slowly, and used to fry 
food. Coals can be raked into the box until the 
rocks are hot and then removed. Meat or veggies 
put inside are baked in the residual heat from the 
stones. 
 Rocks for rock boiling are easier to remove 
from the fi re when the area is smaller, because 
you spend less time hunting around for them. A 
fl at stone leaned against the back of the box can 
be used for drying mashed berries or other foods 
(see “Preserving Food” in Chapter 9).

 When you leave camp for the day, heap the 
coals together in the box and cover them with ash, 
where they will last for a day or more. In the case 
of bonfi res, a rainfall wetting the top few inches 
of ash can seal in the coals, keeping out the draft s 
and allowing a very slow burning of fuel. In this 
case, fire can be coaxed from them for days 
aft erward.

Be mindful of the fi re danger in your area. 
Leaving a fi re unattended or in a windy area can 
be risky. Always be on the lookout for overhang-
ing branches and fl ammable debris nearby. Lin-
ing a fi re pit with stones, clay, mud, or a mixture 
of any of these can prevent the fi re from traveling 
along dead roots underground. Keeping a con-
tainer of water or soil nearby is handy for dowsing 
or smothering a runaway fi re.

Fire pit

 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 5

NAVIGATION

I don’t get lost, but sometimes I become tempo-

rarily unsure of my current location in relation to 
a known point.
 Navigation in a wilderness area is tricky even 
for the experienced traveler. With the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) accurate to ten feet or 
less and the size of a folding cell phone, almost 
anyone can venture into the unknown wilds of 
any remote wilderness area. Th e confi dence such 
a device off ers, however, is dangerous. Th e batter-
ies may not last, and spare batteries can get lost or 
wet and lose their charge, leaving the hiker with 
little more than a memory of the terrain as seen 
through the GPS screen. 

Better-prepared trekkers carry backup sys-
tems or maps and a compass, although if you do 
not have the knowledge required to read such 
instruments, they are next to useless. If you have a 
GPS, use it as a backup or to check your assess-
ment of your current location. If you take a map 
and compass, learn how they are used and prac-
tice. Navigating unfamiliar terrain by using a 
topographical map and a compass may look sim-
ple on paper, but the translation to the fi eld takes 
practice.

WHAT TO DO IF LOST

What if your navigation aids fail or get lost? Or 
perhaps your vehicle breaks down on a seasonal 
road and you have no map or compass and you 
have no choice but to move. How do you proceed? 
Th e Six Ps come into play again here—Proper 
Planning and Practice Prevent Poor Performance. 
If you are going through remote terrain, take a 
minute to look at a map, noting the peaks and 
prominent valleys. What direction must you walk 
to fi nd a major road, and how far off of your 
intended route is it? Road atlas maps will have 
peaks and major rivers listed but will not show 
cliff s or severe changes in elevation. A stream on 
a road map may, in fact, be a canyon that is 400 
feet deep and one mile across, or it may be a dry 
wash. I don’t expect everyone to purchase topo-
graphical maps of every area they drive through, 
pass over on fl ights, or hike into, but knowing 
roughly that a highway is due north and about 
twenty miles away is valuable information.
 A stationary person is easier to find than 
someone who is moving, and if you must move, 
leave indicators as to your presence, including a 

57

 
5 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

note about your direction of travel (an arrow at 
least), your health, and your intentions. If at all 
possible, leave indicators that can be seen from 
the air by rescue aircraft .
 When I was north of the Arctic Circle, I was 
struck with the realization that I could walk for 
hundreds of miles and not see a soul before com-
ing to the Arctic Ocean. Having this experience 
of remoteness is very refreshing for some and 
scary for others. Many environments do not need 
to be trackless wilderness areas to kill the unwary 
traveler, and those folks who aimlessly wander 
with no rational reason for choosing one direc-
tion over another are courting death. Many 
instances of people getting lost and dying as a 
result occur within a mile of help—although the 
victim usually does not know how close he or she 
is. It’s diffi cult to imagine realistic situations that 
would require traveling long distances far from 
any inhabited area in the lower forty-eight states 
with no map or compass, but I can imagine four 
wilderness situations in which, even if you have 
lost your navigational tools, you should move 
rather than stay put:

• 

• 

• 

• 

Your current location is dangerous and/or 
cannot meet your needs (forest fi re approach-
ing; fl ash-fl ood area; steep, unstable ground; 
no water; etc.).
You expect no rescue, because people do not 
know where you are and you failed to men-
tion or changed your plans.
You have an injured person in your party and 
someone must seek medical aid. Th is can be 
tricky in that medical professionals are not 
much help if you can’t take them back to the 
victim.
You are familiar with the area and know how 
to get out safely.

Failing any of these scenarios, once you fi nd 
yourself in an area that can support you for a time 
with water and opportunities for shelter, you 
should set up camp and make yourself as com-
fortable and safe as possible. If the weather is not 
severe and you are healthy, begin exploring the 
immediate area around your camp, bringing 
along necessities such as water, a knife, and 
matches if you have them. Walk a little ways off , 
stop, turn, and consciously look back, noting 
landmarks, trees, tracks, etc. If I head out, day or 
night, I make it a point to look at my back trail—
not just a quick glance over my shoulder but actu-
ally turning around and memorizing what the 
way back looks like. I pay special attention to the 
trees and branches above as well. Th is way, if I 
return in the dark, I can still see the silhouettes 
against the sky. Th is is not as diffi cult as it sounds, 
but it does take practice.

I am not recommending night travel for most 
scenarios, but some situations may call for it. If 
you are in doubt, make marks as you walk; be 
sure that they are signs you will recognize and 
that they cannot be easily removed. In areas of 
low fl ora, it is sometimes possible to erect some-
thing that stands above the surrounding scrub. It 
is surprising how quickly we can forget where 
camp is. Even in fairly open desert, cars can go 
unnoticed when they are relatively close. The 
number of times an off -trail hiker turns left or 
right to circumvent an obstacle is pretty high, so 
imagine traveling in thick chaparral or a spruce 
forest and trying to maintain a heading, even 
with a compass. On the other hand, there are 
areas where you can see a peak or a series of peaks 
many miles away, and walking a straight line is 
simple in clear weather.

If you are truly lost without a clue as to the 
direction of the nearest human habitation, all is 

 
 
 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

59

not lost. Man leaves signs. At night, light pollu-
tion can be seen from more than thirty miles 
away, and on slightly overcast nights, if the cloud 
ceiling is not too low, the lights of towns refl ect-
ing off the clouds make for a rather prominent 
beacon. Highways, trains, and low-fl ying aircraft 
also create noise that can be heard from great dis-
tances. Th ese signs are clearly valuable to the lost, 
but they give no indication of what terrain lies 
between you and them. Rivers are a widely 
accepted goal to lost travelers, as their banks are 
often populated at one point or another. Be 
warned, however, that the banks of waterways are 
not always the most hiker-friendly places; vegeta-
tion can be thick, the terrain steep and unstable, 
and the water may not be safe to swim in.

E-W line

BASIC DIRECTION FINDING

In the absence of a map and compass, here are a 
few aids that may help you fi nd your way, if, for 
example, you happen to know that a major feature 
lies roughly eighty-fi ve miles south of your cur-
rent location.

• 

With the sun out, fi nd a straight stick, orient it 
vertically, and drive or push one end into the 
ground. Find the tip of the shadow and mark 
it with a stone or scrape mark in the ground. 
Wait an hour or until the shadow has moved 
about six inches and mark the spot to where 
the tip of the shadow has moved. Imagine or 
draw a line between the two marks; this is the 
east-west line, and the fi rst mark indicates 
west. Another option is to observe the shad-
ow’s movement as you hike, thereby always 
being aware of the cardinal directions. In the 

• 

• 

Northern Hemisphere, shadows move north-
west to northeast through the day.
To use your watch in determining your direc-
tions, hold your watch level, and turn until 
the hour hand points at the sun. Holding the 
watch still, imagine that a line bisects the 
angle between the hour hand and twelve 
o’clock. Th is line points south. If you have a 
digital watch, you just need to imagine the 
face of a conventional watch in its place or 
simply draw it out on paper or the ground.
It’s possible to improvise a compass from 
some common materials. See the sidebar 
“Improvising a Compass” in this chapter.

If you know your cardinal directions, and you 
know in what direction you need to move, there is 
still plenty of room for error, especially if your 
target destination is small, isolated, and not con-
nected to rail lines or major roads (as in some 
areas in Alaska) or has no major airport.

 
 
6 0 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Watch compass

For example, let’s say that you are trying to get 
to a town due north of your location and you are 
using the North Star as your guide. When you set 
out, you are traveling north. Th en you come to a 
cliff and travel fi ve miles in an easterly direction 
before taking your bearing on the North Star 
again. Will you miss the town? You have now 
moved about fi ve miles laterally, but this shift will 
not show up in your view of the star. Counting 
steps is unreliable over long distances, because 
terrain, fatigue, and other factors will create 
inconsistencies in your stride. If you have a good 
view of the terrain ahead, the best option is to 
locate two or three landmarks in a northerly line 
beyond your obstacle or anywhere along your 
direction of travel as long as they will be visible 
once you have overcome said obstacle. Th is way, 
aft er swinging fi ve miles to the east and around 
the obstacle, you can move back to the west until 
the previously viewed objects once again line up 
and you can continue on your northerly heading 
(see the illustration showing lined-up landmarks 
in this chapter). Sometimes your view is 
obstructed and you have to choose landmarks 

Issues with celestial navigation

that are much closer in proximity to you. It is def-
initely a hassle to constantly check your heading 
this way, but losing patience and trusting your 
sense of direction is foolhardy and can be costly.
 Clearly, navigation poses some interesting 
questions; it is more complicated when you have 
no compass or map. Th e best thing to do is to 
practice, or better yet, prepare before you enter an 
unfamiliar area. I know people who wander all 
over backwoods areas in which they have never 
been. I’m guilty of it myself, but the more wilder-
ness traveling you do, the better you get at noting 
landscape features, the sun’s position, etc. It is 
these things that make up the “sense of direction” 
people claim to have, not an inner compass. 
Learning how to navigate can be fun, and there 
are groups all over the country that hold competi-
tions using a variety of navigational aids. Have 
fun with it and enjoy learning.

 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

61

Lining up objects beyond obstacle

Basic Land Navigation Terms

MAP AND COMPASS

Back Bearing: The direction opposite your direc-

tion of travel. If you are heading 360°, your 

back bearing is 180°.

Back Trail: The trail you have already covered.

Bearing: The horizontal line or direction from 

your location to a speciﬁ c point or landmark 

as it relates to the 360° of a circle.

Declination: The angle between the terrestrial 

North Pole and magnetic north. This varies 

depending on your location and can be found 

on topographical maps.

Lateral Drift: The unintentional lateral or side-

ways travel that builds up as objects are 

circumvented.

Magnetic North: The point on the Earth to which 

a compass needle points (not the North Pole).

Terrestrial North: The North Pole, the point from 

which all northern ends of longitudinal lines 

come. Also known as true north.

Finding your way through unfamiliar terrain is 
greatly eased with the aid of a compass and is 
almost pleasurable if a map of the area is also 
available. It’s valuable to know how to use them 
separately as well as together.

Map Basics

A map is a representation of the Earth’s surface in 
whole or part, showing how land features are 
related to each other with regard to direction, dis-
tance, and size. Diff erent types of maps show 
these and sometimes other (elevation) features to 
varying degrees and thus off er more or less pre-
cise information.
 Types of maps include the following:

• 

Topographical or 
topo maps are two- 
dimensional renderings of three-dimensional 
landscapes. Th ey show elevation in relation 

 
62 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 

• 

• 

• 

to sea level through the use of contour lines 
that are a fi xed vertical distance from sea level 
and one another (the contour interval). Hori-
zontal distances are also easily determined by 
use of the scale at the bottom of the map. 
Other indicators show the directions.
Geologic maps indicate the diff erent types of 
rock found on the surface and are used pri-
marily by geologists to fi nd certain mineral 
deposits, although builders of structures and 
roads also reference them in preparation for 
construction.
Biographic maps show the home habitats of 
plants and animals as well as the migration 
routes of the latter.
Environmental maps show physiological fea-
tures, including woodlands, grasslands, and 
ocean fl oors, as well as human activity (pri-
marily in urban areas). Meteorological maps 
also fi t in this category, as they cover—among 
other meteorological factors—climate, 
weather, and prevailing winds.
Planimetric maps, by definition, show no 
relief; a road atlas is full of such maps and 
merely shows where roads, cities, towns, 
parks, and waterways or bodies of water lie. 
Mountain peaks and chains may be indicated, 
with the heights of more signifi cant features 
listed, but no contour lines are used.

R E A D I N G A M A P. For camping and hiking, the map 
of choice is the topographical map, and from this 
point on, we will concern ourselves only with this 
type.

In the margin around the printed map is 
what, to many, seems a confusing cluster of sym-
bols, numbers, and type. Th is is the legend, and it 
eff ectively provides the reader with the code for 
deciphering the map. Daunting at fi rst, the sym-

bols make logical sense; most novices can quickly 
remember their meaning. On Canadian maps, 
the entire legend is printed, whereas on U.S. maps, 
you are likely to fi nd some information missing 
and need to get the “Topographical Map Sym-
bols” pamphlet; it is free from any U.S. Geological 
Survey (USGS) offi ce or can be downloaded and 
printed from their website.

Below is a description of what you will fi nd on 

these maps.

• 

• 

• 

• 

Scale
. Th is is usually found centrally located 
in the lower margin. Th e USGS has mapped 
most of the lower forty-eight states in a scale 
of 1:24,000 (1 in = 2,000 ft /1 cm = 240 M). 
Th is means that each inch on the map repre-
sents 2,000 feet on land. Some states are 
mapped at 1:25,000 (1 in = 2,083 ft /1 cm = 
250 M). Alaska is mapped primarily at 
1:63,360 (1 in = 1 mile/1 cm = 633.6 M). Cana-
dian maps seem to be predominantly 1:50,000 
(1 in = 4,166 ft /1 cm = 500 M). Both the United 
States and Canada also use 1:250,000 (1 in = 
4 mi/1 cm = 2.5 K). While there are other 
scales, those mentioned here are what you are 
most likely to encounter.
Scale Bars
. Th ese bars make it possible to mea-
sure point to point on the map and then con-
vert easily to feet/meters and miles/kilometers. 
(Note that on USGS quads, the scale bar is 
actually two miles from end to end.)
 (also known as Declina-
Declination Scale
tion Diagram). Found at the base of topo 
maps, this scale shows a representation of the 
angle of declination and gives it in degrees.
. North as defi ned by the vertical 
Grid North
grid lines on a map. This north does not 
always coincide with terrestrial north, because 
the grid lines on small topographical maps 

 
 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

63

• 

• 

run parallel to one another, whereas the lines 
of longitude are lines on a sphere that all begin 
at one point and end at a second point; thus, 
they cannot be parallel.
Terrestrial North or True North
. Th e direc-
tion of a meridian of longitude that converges 
on the North Pole.
Magnetic North
. Th e direction indicated by a 
magnetic compass. Magnetic north moves 
slowly, on average two to three minutes a year 
(60 minutes = 1°), with a variable rate. Cur-
rently, it is approximately 250 nautical miles 
(290 statute miles/465 kilometers) west of 
northern Axel Heiberg Island in Canada.

N AV I G AT I N G W I T H O N LY A M A P. A map by itself is a 
very helpful tool, especially if the landscape has 
easily distinguishable features such as hills or 
mountains. Flatlands, brushy areas, and forests 
are among some of the harder types of terrain to 
navigate through without the aid of a compass. If 
you are heading out from a known point, keeping 
track of your location on a map is far easier than 
fi guring out where you are within the mapped 
area.
 To determine your location if you get lost but 
you do have a map of the area in your possession, 
match up your surroundings with their symbolic 
twins on the map. Of course, this is easier said 
than done. Th e map is the view from above, while 
you are somewhere on the surface. Th is requires 
some careful observation of both the landscape 
and the map.

M A P C A R E . Maps get dirty easily, become illegible, 
and tear along fold lines. Be careful when you are 
packing your map for a trip.
 Use a map case with a clear plastic window 
that allows you to read the map, rain or shine, 

without removing and unfolding it, if possible. 
Th is requires you to look at your overall trip and 
fold the map accordingly so that a good bit of your 
day’s travel is visible at one time. Th e following 
day, you need to remove the map and fold it so 
that the coming section of your trip is viewable. 
Folding and handling your map once a day with 
dry, clean hands is far better than pulling it out of 
your pack or a pocket and unfolding it at every 
bend in the trail.
 Tape the seams or fold lines with a clear, thin 
tape. Th is will prevent the excessive wear that 
maps usually suff er, causing map markings near 
the fold to be marred or obliterated. If you are 
using a map only, or have adjusted your map as 
described in the sidebar “Modifying the Map for 
Declination” (later in this chapter), then the fol-
lowing is an option. On a fl at surface, cut the map 
along the fold lines and separate the pieces by an 
inch. Make sure that each map piece has some of 
the margin visible for orienting the map. Place a 
piece of clear packing tape over the inch-wide 
seam to reconnect the map pieces (but maintain-
ing the one-inch gap), and repeat on the other 
side. Your map, when laid out, will be a series of 
map sections connected by the clear tape. In 
eff ect, you have created a hinge at all of the fold 
points. Th is allows for repetition, as in the case of 
practicing or teaching children on the same ter-
rain. Warning: Th is method results in a map that 
is oft en off by a few degrees or more unless the 
utmost care is taken in placing the pieces of the 
map together to ensure that they all are oriented 
in the exact same way. When you are orienting 
such a map, use the margin of the piece represent-
ing your current location, because it may not jive 
with the other sections around it. Another 
method to help in accuracy, but only if you are 
using a compass in conjunction with such a map, 

 
6 4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

is to alter the map as indicated in step 6 of the sec-
tion “Orienting the Map and Factoring in Decli-
nation,” found later in this chapter. By and large, 
this method is best suited for when your position 
can be verifi ed by clear landmarks.

tool, great things can be done with a compass in 
the hands of a competent person.
 Th ere are several types of compasses available 
in stores. Th ese include the following:

Compass Basics

A compass is not a GPS. It will not teleport you 
out of a jam or point you to the nearest water, 
shelter, or rescuer. It is a tool that can help you fol-
low a specifi c heading or travel out from a point 
and return to that point. With a map, it can assist 
you, if you are lost, in orienting yourself to a 
known point or landmark. Just like any other 

• 

• 

Th e Lensatic or military compass is a type of 
card compass in which the needle is attached 
to the underside of a nonmagnetic card that 
has the cardinal directions and the degrees of 
a circle printed directly on it. In such com-
passes, the whole card rotates rather than just 
the needle.
A base-plate or orienteering compass is 
designed specifi cally for use with a map and 
has a number of features built into it for that 

Various compasses

 
N AV I G AT I O N 

6 5

Lensatic compass

purpose. (Of course, it can be used by itself as 
well.) Th e bezel, a movable ring, encircles the 
needle and has the cardinal directions as well 
as the 360° of a circle printed on it. Some com-
passes have marks every two to four degrees 
rather than every degree.
Other compasses are available; some are 
meant for boats or aircraft or for very specifi c 
purposes like surveying. The goals of this 
book with regard to terrestrial navigation can 
be met using the fi rst two compasses men-
tioned above.

• 

 Th e base of a base-plate compass is imprinted 
with a bearing arrow (also known as a heading or 
direction-of-travel arrow.) Th is is key to taking a 
bearing—i.e., fi nding the compass direction to an 
object. With both forearms braced horizontally 
against your sides, and your compass held level in 
your upturned palm, turn toward a landmark or 
object you wish to go toward so that the bearing 

Base-plate compass

 
6 6 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Improvising a Compass

A needle, a pin, or a piece of wire like a twist tie 

used for closing bread products or garbage bags 

all work as a compass if they are allowed to rotate 

freely. Magnetizing is seldom really necessary; 

however, the “needle” may need more time to 

ﬁ nd north. Rubbing a needle with a magnet or a 

piece of silk in one direction will also magnetize a 

needle. This is best accomplished by allowing it to 

ﬂ oat in an open container of water. Place the nee-

dle in the middle of a small square of toilet paper 

that is the same length as the needle. Lift the 

paper by opposite edges so that the needle is 

slung between them, and gently lower it to the 

surface of the water. Let go. The paper will satu-

rate and slowly sink, leaving the needle ﬂ oating 

on the surface, supported by surface tension. It is 

now free to rotate.

 Depending on how magnetic it is, the time 

required for it to point north will vary from rapid 

to almost imperceptible. If your water container is 

small (three to four inches across), the needle 

may be pulled to the edge as it slides along the 

surface. To determine which end of the needle is 

pointing north, remember that in the Northern 

Hemisphere, the sun travels a path from east to 

west and that this arc does not travel directly 

overhead, but to the south. As you near the equa-

tor, of course, you would have to take note of the 

direction the sun is moving to indicate west.

 A small piece of buoyant material (dry wood, 

cork) can be used to support the needle, pro-

vided it is not too large. Hanging the needle from 

a thread is not as reliable: the thread easily inﬂ u-

ences the direction the needle points, as does any 

breeze.

Improvising a compass

 
arrow points toward it. (Another method is to 
hold your index fi ngers along the sides of the base 
plate with your thumbs hooked behind the com-
pass and your other fi ngers folded beneath it for 
support (see the illustration “Sighting with a base-
plate compass,” later in this chapter). By pulling 
both hands back against your stomach, you have 
a well-braced compass. Holding the base plate 
stationary, turn the bezel until the orienting 
arrow aligns with the north end of the compass 

Compass Terminology

Bezel. The movable ring encircling the compass 

needle; in many cases, the directions are 

printed on it. Also known as the compass 

housing or turntable. It is found on both base-

plate and Lensatic compasses. In the Lensatic 

compass, however, the bezel has a few lines 

on its face that extend onto the clear face of 

the compass over the compass card, but it 

does not have the degrees of the circle on it.

Card. A nonmagnetic disk on Lensatic compasses 

with the directions printed on it and to which 

the magnetic needle is afﬁ xed. This causes the 

whole card to align with magnetic north.

Marker Line. A mark on a compass base parallel 

with the direction-of-travel arrow and under 

the bezel that remains in place and allows an 

observer to see exactly what point of the com-

pass is in line with the direction of travel.

Orienting Arrow or the Shed. On a base-plate or 

orienteering compass, this is the outline of an 

arrow printed on the bottom of the bezel, 

below the needle. The orienting arrow turns 

with the bezel.

N AV I G AT I O N 

67

eedle. Look at the direction-of-travel arrow and 
the bearing it indicates.

N AV I G AT I N G W I T H A CO M PA S S . Th e value of a com-
pass sans map is oft en underestimated, and while 
it may not hold a candle to having a map, too, it 
can still be of great use.
 To take a bearing is to determine the posi-
tion of one object as it relates laterally to another 
(this could be you and a distant hilltop). Depend-
ing on the type of compass used, the method 
varies a bit.
 To take a bearing using a Lensatic compass:

1. Fold the metal loop under the upright 
compass, and place the thumb of your 
dominant hand through it.

2. Fold the dominant index fi nger around 
the compass so that the tip rests on the 
hinge.

3. Form an L with your other thumb and 
index fi nger, and place the fi nger opposite 
the fi rst and the thumb over the one in the 
loop in the same manner as illustrated 
with the base plate compass.

4. Fold the lid of the compass up 90° and the 
eyepiece about 60° (this will need to be 
adjusted for your vision).

5. Hold the compass up to your eye while 
you are closing the other one, and brace 
your elbows against your sides while rest-
ing your thumb against your face. Th is 
gives you a sturdy platform from which to 
read your bearing.

6. Sight through the slit above the eyepiece 
lens, and line up the wire with your 
target.

7. Without moving, look down through the 
lens (adjust it so that you can see the com-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Sighting with a base-plate compass

your whole body until the direction-of-
travel arrow is pointing directly at your 
next goal or landmark.

4. With your thumb, rotate the bezel until 
the orienting arrow is directly underneath 
and in line with the red (north) end of the 
needle. Th e (rather silly) mnemonic for 
this is Red Fred in the Shed.

5. Look at where your direction-of-travel 
arrow intersects with your bezel and read 
the degrees. Th is is your bearing.

USING MAP AND COMPASS TOGETHER

Sighting with a Lensatic compass

pass dial clearly), and read the number of 
degrees on the far side of the dial.

8. Th is is your heading or bearing.

 Th e procedure is diff erent if you’re using a 
base-plate compass:

1. Make an L with your nondominant thumb 
and index fi nger, and hold the compass so 
that the tips of both fi ngers are at opposite 
corners.

2. Do the same with the dominant hand, 

placing the thumb atop the fi rst.

3. At about waist level, pull your hands back 
until they rest against your stomach and 
your arms are braced by your sides. Turn 

When a topo map and a compass are used 
together, it is much easier to put yourself on the 
map and, as you move, to maintain a bird’s-eye 
view of where you are on the landscape. Th is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

69

knowledge allows you to make informed deci-
sions about which direction to go and when to 
alter your immediate course to avoid a signifi cant 
obstacle like a lake or steep cliff s. If you are hiking 
in trailless areas, it is important to start using 
your map and compass while you still know 
where you are. Don’t wait until you become lost.
 To do this, take the following steps:

1. Place the map on the ground and orient it 
to true north, as described in steps 2 and 3 
in the section “Orienting the Map and 
Factoring in Declination,” later in this 
chapter.

2. Look at your planned route on the map, 
and take a bearing from your current loca-
tion to the end of the fi rst leg.

3. View your direction of travel, and, if the 
landscape allows (growth is not too dense), 
fi nd a landmark toward which to head and 
note the lay of the land. If the area is thick 
with vegetation and your view is limited, 
look at your map for easily defi nable fea-
tures, such as drainages, streams, cliff s, 
etc., that are large or long and close enough 
that you can fi nd them even if you are a 
few degrees off course.

4. Take a back bearing and fi nd a landmark 
to aid in your return or if you lose sight of 
your forward landmark. Th is back land-
mark can aid you in determining your 
location on the map.

5. Set out toward your landmark, and, upon 
reaching it, take another bearing to your 
next landmark until you reach the 
next leg.

Before you begin on the second leg of your 
route, consult your map to verify your position. 

Bearing from route and bearing from lateral drift 

position

Depending on your view of the surrounding land, 
this is more or less precise. If you are in a wash 
that is fi lled with dense cover, you will need to 
take into account the terrain of your backtrail, 
noting how many washes you walked through. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

You should be able to identify the wash you are in 
and approximate where in the wash you are based 
on other indicators, such as bends, how much you 
climbed, or descended, and what, if any, land-
marks you saw on your way in. If you have a good 
view, you can orient your map to true north and 
locate hilltops or mountaintops that are visible on 
both the map and landscape. Take a bearing on 
them, and draw a pencil line on the map that cor-
responds to that bearing. Aft er doing this with 
one peak, you have identifi ed a line on which you 
are located. To determine where on the line you 
are, you must repeat the process with another 
landmark that is preferably not close to the fi rst 
one. Where the two lines intersect is your current 
location. To really pinpoint your location, fi nd a 
third landmark and draw a line. Much of the time 
it will not intersect the fi rst two lines in the spot 
where they cross. Th e result is a small triangle 
called the triangle of error. It is within this trian-
gle that you currently stand.

TN

MN

TN

MN

East 
Declination

Stake setup for understanding declination

 As you gain experience reading the land and 
remembering the type of terrain you have passed 
over, you will not need to spend much time veri-
fying your position nor with the frequency men-
tioned here. Additionally, as you better learn to 
read maps, you’ll fi nd it easier to hold a three-
dimensional picture of the terrain in your mind, 
which will also reduce the frequency with which 
you need to check the map.

DECLINATION

By far the most diffi cult aspect of map and com-
pass work for the novice to understand is declina-
tion or variation, but it cannot be ignored; thus, 
the following must be understood. Th ere are two 
North Poles—the terrestrial North Pole and the 
magnetic North pole. Th e Earth rotates on its 
axis, one end of which is the terrestrial North 
Pole and the other the terrestrial South Pole. 
Unfortunately, magnetic north is not in the same 
place; as of 2008, it was about 365 nautical miles 
(442 statute miles/711 kilometers) from true 
north. According to the Geological Survey of 
Canada, magnetic north is moving at a rate of up 
to forty kilometers per year. At issue is that maps 
are oriented to true north while compasses point 
to magnetic north.
 To make the concept of declination more 
clearly understood, drive two stakes into the 
ground four or fi ve feet apart. For clarity, mark 
one “MN” for magnetic north and the other “TN” 
for true north. Leave a good foot or more protrud-
ing above the ground, and stand back twenty feet 
so that both stakes are lined up, with the MN 
stake closer to you. Th is view illustrates zero dec-
lination or the agonic line (because both the MN 

 
and the TN stakes are in line with you, the com-
pass will point to both). Begin walking slowly in a 
circle around the two stakes and they will, of 
course, no longer be aligned with each other in 
relation to you. A gap will appear between them 
and will grow as you walk. Th e diff erence in angle 
between one and the other represents the declina-
tion. A westerly declination “pulls” the compass 
needle to the west of TN by x°, or the local decli-
nation. An easterly declination pulls the needle 
east of TN also by the local declination.
 Th is is the most daunting aspect of orienteer-
ing to the novice, so I will explain, step-by-step, 
how to plan routes using a map and compass, a 
map alone, and a compass alone.

In order to use a compass and map to good 
eff ect, you must factor in declination and adjust 
your compass and map accordingly.

Orienting the Map and Factoring 
in Declination

If you are using a map and compass together, the 
following steps can smooth the navigational 
aspects of following a fi xed route.

1. Plan your route and draw it on the map.
2. Orient your map to MN: turn the bezel 
until the N and the direction-of-travel 
arrow are lined up. Place the edge of the 
base plate along one side of the map (lined 
up with the margin line), with the 
 direction-of-travel arrow pointing to the 
top of the map. Rotate the map with the 
compass on it until Red Fred Is in the Shed. 
Your map is now oriented to MN. Unless 
you happen to be sitting on the agonic 
line, the orientation of the map will not 
jive with the surrounding landscape, 

N AV I G AT I O N 

71

because the map is drawn to true north 
and you’ve just aligned it with magnetic 
north.

3. If, for example, your declination is 18° 
east, that means that the compass needle 
is pulled 18° to the east of TN and you 
need to cancel out the 18° by subtracting it 
from your bearing and rotating the map 
18° to the west. If your declination is 12° 
west, this needs to be canceled out by add-
ing it to your bearing and rotating the map 
and compass to the east by 12°. Some peo-
ple fi nd it easier to remember to add the 
number of degrees of a westerly declina-
tion and subtract the number of degrees of 
an easterly declination, but only when tak-
ing the direction from the compass and 
applying it to a map.

4. Place the edge of the base plate along the 
fi rst leg of your route, with the direction 
arrow pointing in your desired direction 
of travel.

5. Rotate the bezel until the needle is housed 
in the orienting or north arrow (i.e., put 
Red Fred in the Shed).

6. Look at your direction-of-travel arrow and 
the corresponding line in the bezel for 
your uncorrected heading. At this point, 
your heading is off by the declination for 
your area.

7. Add or subtract the local declination 
(found at the bottom of the map) from 
your uncorrected heading. Remember, 
East Is Least (subtract), West Is Best (add). 
For an easterly declination, subtract the 
declination from the uncorrected head-
ing. If your declination is westerly, add 
that number to your uncorrected heading. 
Example: if my declination is 14° west and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 2 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Red Fred out of the shed

Red Fred in the shed 

my uncorrected heading is 140°, adding 
the two gives me 154°, my corrected head-
ing. (East Is Least, West Is Best applies only 
when you are getting your direction from 
the map and applying it to the compass. 
Th e rule is reversed when you are applying 
your compass bearing to the map.)

8. If your compass is equipped with a fi xed 
declination scale, then step 5 above can be 

altered in the following way to eliminate 
step 7 altogether: Instead of turning the 
bezel to put Red Fred in the Shed, merely 
turn the bezel until the needle is pointing 
at +14°, or whatever your local declination 
is on the fi xed declination scale. Proceed 
to step 6 and you will see your corrected 
heading.

Compass oriented to magnetic north

declination scale

Compass oriented to true north using the built-in 

 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

7 3

Modifying the Map for Declination

If ﬁ guring declination in the ﬁ eld is just too much 

3. Consult the declination scale at the bottom 

to remember, you can simplify the process by 

margin of the map, and either grab your 

altering the map to read in magnetic degrees 

protractor and straightedge or a base-

prior to your trip. This simply involves drawing a 

plate compass and straightedge. From this 

series of parallel lines across your map at the local 

point, you can follow either the protractor 

angle of declination. When you are doing this, 

method or the straightedge method.

make sure to work on a smooth, ﬂ at surface with 

no magnetic metal in the area—this includes the 

straightedge or hardware in the work surface.

Protractor method
For the protractor method, you will need to draw 

a latitude line connecting latitude marks on the 

1. Lay out and orient your map.

edge of your map (make sure that they are the 

2. Follow steps 1 through 3 on page 71.

same).

Map with magnetic north lines drawn in

 
 
 
 
74 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Modifying the Map for Declination (continued)

1. Place a mark on the latitude line near 

2. Rotate the whole compass until Red Fred 

where you will be hiking.

Is in the Shed. Your compass now points 

2. Place your protractor on the mark, and 

to MN.

then make another mark that corresponds 

3. Place a straightedge along the edge of 

to the local declination.

the base plate (be sure to hold it ﬁ rmly), 

3. With your straightedge, connect the dots. 

and draw your MN line.

I like to extend the lines over the whole 

4. Continue either by using the compass as 

map if conditions allow.

a protractor or by running parallel lines 

4. You can continue by using the protractor 

on either side of the straightedge as in 

or by simply running a line down the other 

step 3.

side of the straightedge and then shifting 

5. Once the map is oriented with the mag-

it over, lining it up with the previous line 

netic north lines to MN, any bearing taken 

and drawing again.

does not need to be corrected for 

declination.

Straightedge Method

1. Adjust your compass so that the orienting 

arrow is pointing to the direction-of-travel 

arrow, and place it on the map.

FOLLOWING A BEARING

If you have never used a compass to follow a spe-
cifi c heading, it may seem like a fairly easy task, 
but when you consider the oft en circuitous route 
through trailless areas, it becomes clear that such 
a task is more challenging than a stroll in the 
park. Trees, boulders, bodies of water, cactus 
patches, dense growth, cliff s, and other objects 
prevent you from moving in a straight line. Even 
the path of modern highways is aff ected by the 
topography and geology of a given area. Th e idea 
of walking due north, for example, by keeping the 
compass needle pointing to the same degree line 
on the bezel, becomes preposterous at best. Per-
haps the fi rst hundred feet of your course are fl at. 

Th en you may need to walk around a boulder, so 
you move to the left and resume your course on 
the other side. If the boulder or other obstacle is 
small and you are not traveling far, this may not 
be too much of a problem. If the obstacle is a river 
and you need to travel more than a few feet up- or 
downriver to find a safe crossing point, your 
chance of resuming your course on the opposite 
bank in a straight line with your trail from the 
beginning is very small indeed. Aft er a number of 
these obstacles, large or small, you will have wan-
dered more to one side than the other. Depending 
on the original distance to your destination and 
the size of your target, you may walk past it and 
not even know it. Th is is called lateral drift and is 
shown on page 69.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is possible to line up objects in the distance 
in order to regain a heading aft er you have cir-
cumnavigated an obstacle. Refer back to the illus-
tration on page 61. Th e same can be done with a 
compass, but this method is far easier to do. It 
must be noted that this compass technique is used 
even in easily walked terrain, not just for dealing 
with obstacles. If the obstacle is a lake, a bearing 
is taken and a corresponding landmark on the 
opposite side is found. If possible, a bearing is 
taken on your backtrail and a landmark is noted, 
thus allowing confi rmation that the original bear-
ing has been regained once the other side of the 
lake has been reached. If the object in your path is 
a mountain, a bearing is taken and a landmark 

Triangulating with bird’s-eye view and ground 

view

N AV I G AT I O N 

75

located; once the landmark is reached, the process 
is repeated.

Returning to Start Point

To travel out from a known point, it is important 
to fi rst note any landmarks that will help you 
identify your camp location. These should be 
large enough to note from some distance. Some-
times a large tree or rock outcropping can provide 
the marker; other times it will be the proximity to 
an easily recognizable hill or mountaintop. You 
may describe the location somewhat like this: 
“When in camp, the pointy peak is just to the 
right of the mesa, and the butte looks like it’s rest-
ing on top of the little mesa.”
 When I leave a new camp, I use two tech-
niques for remembering the way to and from 
camp more than any others. Th e fi rst is that I look 
up. I look at the tree branches and the surround-
ing hills or mountains and note prominent or odd 
and intriguing shapes. Th is method helps, because 
these features can be seen even at night when fea-
tures of the ground or trail are either not visible 
or are distorted by the beam of a fl ashlight. Th e 
second tool that I utilize is that of observing my 
backtrail and noting my back bearing. I do not 
simply take a casual glance over my shoulder; I 
stop and turn and really look at where I am com-
ing from and what it will look like when I return. 
It is always so heartening when you recognize, 
with surety, a landmark telling you that you are 
on the right path and that you are not as lost as 
you had assumed. Part of assessing your backtrail 
is to see if your camp markers are prominent 
enough to serve their purpose. Some terrain is 
tricky in that, from camp, close landmarks look 
prominent but from a half mile or more away they 
are lost in the landscape—still visible, but not 

 
 
76 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

the same number of paces counted off and so on 
until you return to the starting point.

PLANNING A ROUTE

When you are planning a route for a trip over new 
ground, you must account for physical ability, ter-
rain, weather, and the like and, if possible, glean 
information from all sources like books, the 
Internet, or—best of all—people who are familiar 
with the area. For the example below, let’s look for 
the easiest route. Assuming that all of the infor-
mation you have on the area is your topo map, 
planning a trip might proceed as follows.

1. Select your starting and ending points.
2. Now that you know where you want to go 
and from whence you wish to begin, you 
need to select a route that for many may be 
the easiest and shortest (not always one 
and the same). Others may wish to visit a 
few other points of interest (POI) that are 
more or less out of the way. If you are 
including such points, they, along with 
your start and fi nish points, need to be 
marked on the map.

3. While looking at the terrain, you need to 
connect the dots and assess the route that 
these connected dots have you walking.
4. Adjust the route if necessary. The line 
between your start and the fi rst POI may 
have you scaling a seventy-foot cliff rather 
than skirting it. I usually adjust my travel 
lines to be more or less straight. Each 
straight section is called a leg.

5. Orient your map to TN, and on a piece of 
paper put down a number for each leg. 

Aiming off

prominent. In such cases, it is wise to fi nd larger 
landmarks beyond your camp. Note their direc-
tion so that, upon your return, when they are both 
at the same compass points, you should be able to 
see your smaller landmarks that will take you 
right to your camp.

If you are camped near a river, by a prominent 
line of cliff s, at the foot of mountains, near a rail-
road, or by some other fairly straight landmark, 
you can, upon your return, “aim off ”—that is, 
intentionally aim 5° off of where your camp is. 
Th is means that even with lateral drift you will 
still be to the side of your camp when you reach 
the straight landmark and will therefore know 
which way to go.
 Th ere are other methods that utilize the com-
pass, but they are more mechanical and, in my 
view, are less reliable unless the terrain allows you 
to count the paces or your pace is steady enough 
to allow the timing of each leg. In such cases, it is 
possible to head out from your camp on, say, a 
due-north heading. Paces are kept as even as pos-
sible and are counted. Aft er a given number of 
paces, the heading could be adjusted by 90° and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N AV I G AT I O N 

7 7

subtract degrees of declination; for east 
declination, add degrees.)

8. Write the corrected bearing next to the leg 
number, and measure the distance using 
the appropriate scale on the side of the 
base-plate compass. (Th e distance will be 
approximate, as most terrain will not 
allow you to move as the crow fl ies.)

9. At the end of the leg, jot down a few notes 
on landmarks that will help you confi rm 
your position (as done on the following 
page). Taking the bearing on a few peaks 
or other landmarks that you believe will 
be visible from there can be handy if you 
are in any kind of rush while you’re on the 
trail, because with the bearings already 
written down, you will only need to con-
fi rm them with the compass.
 10. Follow the above steps for each leg.

I imagine that I am sending the instructions 
out with a novice, making sure to write them sim-
ply and clearly so that when I am exhausted, wet, 
or otherwise operating with decreased mental 
acuity, I can still follow and understand them and 
get where I need to go.
 Th e fi nal step in planning your trip is to tell a 
reliable friend or two where you will be going and 
when you expect to return. I suggest a little more 
detail than “See ya man, going to Everest, be back 
next Sunday.” If you really want a bombproof 
emergency plan, make copies of your route plan 
and direction sheet, including your earliest and 
latest estimated completion times as well as what 
your friend should do in the event that you do not 
show by the scheduled time. Leave those with 
your friend or loved one and stick to your plan. If 
circumstances require a trip alteration that will 
delay your return, LET THEM KNOW ASAP!

Route plan with legs and target points

Start at the top of the page and descend. 
Take the bearing for each leg. This is 
accomplished by placing the edge of the 
compass’s base plate along the route with 
the direction-of-travel arrow pointing in 
the desired direction of travel.

6. Rotate the bezel until Red Fred Is in the 
Shed, and read the degrees where the 
direction-of-travel arrow intersects the 
bezel.

7. Adjust for declination, remembering that 
you are applying your bearing to the map 
from the compass. (For west declination, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
78 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

Leg Bearing Approx. distance

Landmarks

0.6 miles

arrive in saddle with peaks at 30° and 210°

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.3

passing west of small peak on saddle, hit fi rst peak at 10°

follow 56° to ridge/saddle 

follow ridge NNW until “Th e Knob” is visible through saddle @ at 130°

follow heading of 90° upslope to peak

drop down, then climb up to plateau 

drop to drainage, traverse slope until peaks at 32° and 102° are seen

hit road and head easterly until it intersects Hide Road 

314°

10°

56°

332°

90°

62°

80°

55°

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Route plan and direction sheet

 
C H A P T E R 6

MEDICAL EMERGENCIES

In a survival situation, your body is your greatest 

tool. Much depends upon your physical capacity 
to fi nd or create shelter, obtain water, gather wood 
for a fi re and keep one going, and possibly travel 
on foot to safety. I don’t have to tell you to try to 
stay healthy and to be careful to avoid accidents, 
but sickness and accidents occur even to the 
careful.
 Th ankfully, mortality rates are much lower 
now than in the nineteenth century, when medi-
cal science was relatively undeveloped and good 
medical knowledge was not widespread. The 
nature of microbial infections was not under-
stood, and death from “minor” cuts was not at all 
uncommon.
 Once, while butchering a deer, I failed to 
properly support the hanging carcass. It slipped 
against my knife hand and drove the knife 
through the wrist of my free hand. I cleaned the 
wound, went to the hospital, and had them treat 
it. Within a day, it started to hurt badly, but the 
tendon and hand specialist thought that I was just 
a whiner and sent me home. A day later, I was 
admitted to the hospital with a raging infection 
that took four days to reduce with antibiotics. In 
the wild, that moment of carelessness would have 
killed me.

But injuries need not be so grievous to be dan-
gerous. A friend and I were on an excursion, 
prowling the hills barefoot as usual, when he got a 
very shallow slice on his foot. It did not cause him 
much pain and so he ignored it. A few days later, 
he was limping but hanging tough, and when I 
fi nally looked at it I saw clear, red lines running 
up his leg from the wound. We immediately 
aborted our trip, got out, and got medical help. It 
would not have mattered how tough he was in the 
wild, or anywhere for that matter; without atten-
tion, this wound would have killed him!
 Do not mess around with injuries! Apply fi rst 
aid immediately. Then, if you have any doubt 
about the injury’s severity, seek outside help if at 
all possible.

FIRST AID

It is not uncommon for injury or illness to occur 
while you are in the backcountry. Because all 
members of a party must depend on one another 
for the health and safety of the group, it is your 
obligation to alert the other members if you have 
injured yourself or are feeling ill. In this way, the 

79

 
8 0 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

group can help assess the situation immediately 
and not midway up a multipitch climb when you 
simply cannot go on. A good acronym to remem-
ber is S.T.O.P.

resources, kills moral, and greases the slope to 
despair and tragedy. Keep your head on your 
shoulders and use it!

S. Stop and calm down. Don’t move (unless 
your life depends on immediate action). 
Assess your injuries and realize that you are 
in a survival situation. Even if you think it 
will all work out, maintain a survival mind-
set until you are really in the clear.

T. Th ink, do not act, until you have thought 
through the next few actions. Make con-
scious decisions that will not turn around 
and bite you.

O. Observe your surroundings and make a full 

assessment not only of your body, but of your 
location and your assets, which include oth-
ers in your party and any materials that can 
aid you not only now but until help arrives.

P. Plan out your next course of action—not only 
what you will do, but how. What resources 
will it take, and what will it leave you with?

 When you have a plan, a known course of 
action, your effi ciency will improve, progress will 
be made toward your goal, and your morale will 
get a boost. Th ere are situations that can go from 
helpless to hopeless. Th at is when you need to dig 
deep and use your mental toughness to work your 
way through a problem. When a decision is made, 
don’t waffl e—act. All too oft en, people become 
overwhelmed by a situation that they fi nd too far 
outside their norm. Th ey make decisions, start to 
go with them, and then second-guess themselves 
and take a diff erent tack. Th is wastes energy and 

First-Aid Kits

Having the tools to deal with a medical emer-
gency or preventing a minor medical incident 
from becoming a medical emergency is key and is 
not too diffi cult. Remember that having a fi rst-aid 
kit does not mean that being careless is OK. When 
I worked for the park service as a hog hunter, we 
had an individual on the trail crew who wore 
Kevlar chainsaw chaps when using a chainsaw. 
Th is particular individual’s chaps were shredded, 
because his impression was that the purpose of 
the chaps was to stop the chain from hitting fl esh; 
therefore, that’s what he used the chaps for. Other 
members of the crew had unblemished (if dirty) 
chaps and used them only as a second line of 
defense aft er using common sense.

Below is a list of foundation items for a fi rst-
aid kit to be included in a survival kit. Th ey do 
not cover every possible contingency, so add items 
that you think you would need; keep space and 
weight in mind, too.

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

Band-Aids, assorted: Get the cloth ones, 
because they stick better, last longer, and are 
more breathable.
Sterile pads: Two-inch-by-two-inch pads are 
great for small wounds that initially bleed 
more than a Band-Aid can handle.
Nonadhesive sterile dressing: for those larger 
wounds and burns.
Antiseptic towelettes.
Moleskin: When you start to get hot spots on 
your feet—those irritating red spots alerting 

 
 
MEDIC AL EMERGENCIE S 

81

First-aid kit laid out and packed

you to points of friction and the future site of 
a blister—put this on so that you can still walk 
tomorrow.
Foam bunion doughnuts: If you weren’t quick 
enough with the moleskin, these foam dough-
nuts placed over a blister can make it possible 
to keep moving if you have to.
Small, sharp scissors: Handy for removing 
avulsed, dead skin that can keep catching dirt 
and resealing over the wound. (An avulsion is 
a cut wound resulting in a fl ap of skin or fl esh 
that becomes partially separated from the 
fl esh beneath it.)
Steri-strips or butterfl y Band-Aids: Steri-strips 
are great in lieu of stitches for holding cleaned 
wounds together. (Make sure that the wound 
is clean before you seal it up.)
Gauze roll: for wrapping burns and holding 
on sterile pads.
Cloth sling: for use as a sling to support an 
arm and/or a shoulder. It can also be rolled or 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

folded into a strip about four inches wide and 
wrapped bandage-style around a dressed 
wound. In addition, it can multitask as a 
debris fi lter for water prior to iodine treatment 
(pour water through it as you would a strainer 
to remove larger bits of debris) and as a head 
covering.
Neosporin/triple antibiotic ointment: apply 
to cuts.
Plastic syringe: For forcefully irrigating cuts 
with clean water, fi nd one with a fl exible tip. 
Th is is handy but not imperative to have.

• 

• 

 
8 2 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

• 
• 

• 

• 

Ibuprofen: provides relief from allergies.
Waterproof sports tape: for holding dressings 
in place and adding joint support.
Iodine drops, 2 percent: Five drops per quart 
of clear water; let the solution stand for thirty 
minutes before drinking. Dirty-looking water 
should be fi ltered through a cloth or, if you 
have more than one container, left to settle. 
Th en you can pour the clear water off into 
your drinking container prior to treatment. If 
the water still looks unappealing, add up to 
ten drops and let it stand for an hour before 
consuming. Cold-weather use of iodine 
requires a longer sit time, according to both 
the Wilderness Medical Society and the 
National Safety Council. Five drops per quart 
at 40°F require a three-hour sit time, while ten 
drops have it ready in one hour. To prevent 
getting ill by ingesting untreated water from 
the lip of your water container, simply leave 
the lid partially unscrewed and upend the 
bottle, allowing treated water to dribble out 
and clean the mouth as it does so.
Hard candy: A little sugar can help morale 
and give a quick burst of energy when 
needed.

HEAT-RELATED PROBLEMS

in my body was evaporating before it was able to 
wet my skin and then cool it as it evaporated. 
Working or engaging in physical activity at such 
times taxes your body as it attempts to dispel 
excessive heat. If you continue the activity, your 
core body temperature may rise and cause one or 
more of the four following illnesses as you become 
hyperthermic (overheated):

• 
• 
• 
• 

Heat syncope
Heat cramps
Heat exhaustion
Heatstroke

Heat Syncope

Heat syncope is a minor heat illness brought on 
by inactivity when you are in a hot climate. It is 
also brought on if you rise quickly from a seden-
tary break. As you sit in the heat, your vascular 
activity increases as your body tries to keep cool. 
Th e lack of muscle movement hinders the eff orts 
of the heart to move blood, causing it to collect in 
the lower extremities. Th is means that less blood 
is being pumped out of the heart and less is going 
to the brain. As a result, fainting can occur.
 To treat heat syncope: Lay the victim down 
and keep him or her shaded while resting. Th e 
person should improve quickly. If the victim fell, 
he or she needs to be assessed for other injuries.

In hot environments, overheating is not hard to 
do, especially in areas of high humidity where 
cooling due to the evaporation of sweat off the 
skin is slowed because of the moisture already in 
the air. In dry, desert climates, I have had mois-
ture pulled from my skin before I ever began 
sweating. Th is left salt crusted in my facial hair 
and eyebrows; I got no relief because the moisture 

Heat Cramps

Heavy activity in hot climates can bring on heat 
cramps, especially when you are sweating and not 
replenishing your electrolytes. Cramps occur in 
the most active muscles.
 To treat heat cramps: Cramps should be mas-
saged and stretched in opposition to their cramp-

 
ing or contractions. A teaspoon of salt per quart 
of water will help the victim as well as prevent 
heat cramps from occurring.

Heat Exhaustion

Heat exhaustion should be suspected when a 
member of your party exhibits some of the fol-
lowing: muscular cramps, vomiting, excessive 
sweating, thirst, low fever, nausea, loss of appetite, 
and a drop in blood pressure upon standing.
 To treat heat exhaustion: Move the victim to 
a cooler location if possible while keeping him or 
her lying down. Do not allow the victim to walk 
unassisted if he or she is “muscling through” their 
discomfort. A fall would likely exacerbate the sit-
uation and add potentially life-threatening inju-
ries to the equation. Loosen restrictive clothing 
and remove heavy garments. If the victim is able 
to drink or swallow, give the person room- 
temperature water with one-half teaspoon of salt 
stirred or shaken in. Th is should have the victim 
well on his or her way to feeling much better. If 
the victim does not improve, exhibits an altered 
mental state, and shows an elevated temperature 
beyond a low fever, the person needs prompt 
medical attention. Get the victim out or get the 
search and rescue (SAR) team in!

Heatstroke

Heatstroke typically occurs due to excessive activ-
ity in a hot environment. Some other factors are 
wearing too much clothing, not acclimatizing to 
higher temperatures than those to which you are 
accustomed, and your body not having the ability 
to dispel heat for a variety of medical reasons.

Symptoms include: skin is hot to the touch; a 
temperature taken orally is oft en above 104°F; 

MEDIC AL EMERGENCIE S 

8 3

and the mental state is altered, ranging from 
being dizzy and having a headache to being unre-
sponsive and having facial fl ushing, although the 
skin may be pale. If left untreated, the victim will 
likely exhibit signs of increasing damage: he or 
she may become delirious, have seizures, vomit, 
or discharge bloody stool and/or diarrhea.
 To treat heatstroke: Heatstroke is deadly, 
and a heatstroke victim must be treated quickly 
and continually until he or she is in the care of 
professionals.

1. Get the victim out of the sun or heat.
2. Cool the victim down with any of the fol-
lowing means: remove clothing; place ice, 
if possible, in the armpits and crotch; wet 
down the victim by sponging him or her 
with water, using a cloth; fan the victim if 
no breeze is blowing.

3. Continue to assess the victim; check the 
victim’s temperature. Discontinue cooling 
when 99.6°F is reached, but resume cool-
ing if the temperature of the victim begins 
to rise again.

4. Check and record the pulse and 

respirations.

5. Elevate the feet eight to twelve inches to 

help if shock occurs.

6. Get the victim to advanced medical help 

as soon as possible!

COLD-RELATED INJURIES

Cold is one of the more dangerous challenges 
we face in our day-to-day survival. Cold causes 
our blood to be shunted away from our extremi-
ties and held in our core. Th e initial result is a lack 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 4 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

in dexterity, general clumsiness, and numbing of 
the more exposed parts of the body. In some con-
ditions, frostbite can cause permanent damage in 
a very short period of time, while in milder con-
ditions, it can sap your energy and directly impact 
your ability to perform simple tasks. A lack of 
sleep further taxes your body’s resources.

Hypothermia

According to the National Ski Patrol, hypo-
thermia is when the core temperature of a person 
drops below 95°F. In cold environments, keeping 
your body to that sacred number, 98.6°F, is para-
mount to your survival, and it’s all too easy for 
that number to drop if you’re not careful.

Prolonged exposure to cold with inadequate 
protection (clothing and shelter), damp clothing, 
and/or direct contact with cold materials (includ-
ing submersion in water and dealing with wind) 
can all bring on hypothermia in short order.
 As the body temperature drops to 95°F, invol-
untary shivering begins as the body attempts to 
generate heat. A loss of dexterity and experienc-
ing general clumsiness, as well as stumbling and 
having an inability to think or speak clearly, also 
are clear indicators of hypothermia. Th e ability to 
touch the tip of your thumb to your pinky fi nger-
tip of the same hand becomes an impossible task, 
illustrating how this condition can quickly spiral 
into a deadly situation. If you can’t move your fi n-
gers eff ectively, how can you put on more cloth-
ing, get wet gear off , erect a shelter, or start a fi re? 
If help does not arrive or the situation does not 
improve, then shivering will stop as your body 
temperature drops below 90°F. It is at this point 
that you will need external heat to warm yourself 
up. Your breathing and heart rate slow as you slip 
into an unresponsive condition. When your tem-

perature drops below 80°F, death is soon to fol-
low. Depending on the situation, this can all 
happen in less than an hour.
 Hypothermia can be divided into two catego-
ries: mild, 98.6 to 90°F, and severe, below 90°F. 
Another defi ning quality that diff erentiates one 
type from another is the duration that the victim 
has been exposed to the cold. In acute hypo-
thermia victims, exposure is an hour or less, 
whereas chronic hypothermia victims are 
exposed to the cold for extended periods. A cold-
water submersion would classify as an acute case, 
whereas a chronic case would likely be found on a 
ski slope amongst inadequately dressed skiers.
 To treat hypothermia:

1. Stop further heat loss. Th is can be accom-
plished by removing wet clothing and 
donning dry clothing. If no dry clothing is 
available, get out of the wind and weather, 
and get in a sleeping bag or a pile of 
leaves.

2. Rewarm yourself. Do this by any means 
possible—body-to-body contact (get in a 
leaf pile or sleeping bag with them), hot 
packs (not great, as they provide little heat, 
but even so, do not place them directly on 
your skin), fi re, hot liquids, water contain-
ers fi lled with hot water, or heated stones. 
Heated objects should never be placed 
directly against the skin, because the skin 
is more sensitive to heat on a hypothermia 
victim. Such objects should be tested fi rst 
by touching them to the wrist, as you 
would test the heat of bottled milk for a 
baby. In the case of heated rocks, be care-
ful. Water should not sizzle when it is 
dripped on the rock, but should spread 
and evaporate slowly. Th ese objects will 

 
 
 
 
do the most good when you place them in 
the armpits and along the sides of the neck 
and groin.

3. Warm liquids serve two purposes: Th ey 
heat from the inside (valuable even though 
little heat is actually transferred), and they 
provide liquids to victims who are oft en 
dehydrated as well as hypothermic.

4. Handle the victim gently. According to 
Warren Bowman and the National Ski 
Patrol (Outdoor Emergency Care, 1998), 
ventricular fibrillation—a condition in 
which the lower chambers of the heart 
fl utter instead of beat due to disordered 
electrical activity, thus causing the heart 
to fail as a pump by moving little or no 
blood through the body—is the most 
common cause of death in hypothermia 
cases. Th is can be brought on by sudden 
jarring of the patient who has a core tem-
perature below 90°F.

Frostbite

Th e freezing of a body part from exposure usu-
ally occurs on the nose, cheek, ears, fi ngertips, 
and tips of the toes. Frostnip is the precursor to 
frostbite, and although a few ice crystals may be 
present on the skin, the area underneath is still 
soft so that only the upper or superfi cial layers of 
skin freeze. Frostnip does not even result in 
blistering.

In true frostbite, there are two categories—
superfi cial, involving the layers of the skin, and 
deep, involving not only the skin but the underly-
ing tissue, tendons, muscle, and bone. Th e aff ected 
body part is hard, infl exible, and yellowish in 
color; it stops hurting or tingling when it reaches 
this point. When thawing occurs, the aff ected 

MEDIC AL EMERGENCIE S 

8 5

area may be grayish purple in color, painful tin-
gling may occur, and clear or yellowy, liquid-fi lled 
blisters may form. In deep frostbite, the blisters 
are oft en smaller and fi lled with a reddish purple 
fl uid; in less severe cases, no blisters form on the 
dark purple, puff y skin, which is common in the 
most severe cases.
 To treat frostnip: Heat the aff ected area by 
directly placing it against another part of the 
body; for example, a frostnipped fi nger can be 
placed in the mouth or armpit.
 To treat frostbite: Do not allow the aff ected 
part to refreeze if it has thawed by the time it is 
noticed. If you have a sheltered area and can 
ensure proper protection for the aff ected area, it 
can be rapidly thawed in a water bath. Th is is 
tricky, however, because the temperature of the 
water needs to be within a few degrees of 104°F 
until the aff ected area is thawed. Th is is a painful 
process and, if possible, should be left for the pro-
fessionals. If you are not equipped to work on a 
rapid thaw and you are only a few hours from 
help, leaving the frozen area alone may be the 
best option. Do not rub the aff ected area with 
snow, pop blisters, or try to rewarm the part by 
the fi re.

PHYSICAL INJURIES

When it comes to dealing with severe injuries like 
broken bones, severe sprains, and concussions, 
there is not a great deal that an untrained person 
can do other than seek medical attention from 
trained professionals. It is not uncommon for 
untrained “rescuers” to exacerbate an injury while 
attempting to help. If a member of your group, or 
you, suffers a concussion, for example, what 

 
 
 
 
8 6 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

action could you take? Without a hospital (includ-
ing a CAT scan in your back pocket), your only 
choice is to seek help. If you want to be able to 
handle severe injuries, the time to learn how is 
now, not with a book while you are kneeling next 
to an unconscious victim at the base of a cliff , or 
while you are cradling a freshly broken arm. A 
number of organizations off er courses in wilder-
ness fi rst aid (WFA), wilderness fi rst responder 
(WFR), and wilderness emergency medical tech-
nician (WEMT). While these courses may not 
prepare you for all emergencies, you will be vastly 
more able to deal with most injuries that may 
crop up. Included here are injuries that are fairly 
typical for backcountry hikes and camping trips. 
Th ese injuries can range from minor to severe, 
but keep in mind that even the smallest splinter 
can cause infection if it is not dealt with properly. 
Infection can be deadly.

Open Wounds

Caring for open wounds in today’s society is fairly 
simple, but step into the wild places without the 
comfort of even the most rudimentary fi rst-aid 
kit and a splinter could be the end of you. A fi rst-
aid kit is an invaluable fi rst line of defense. First, a 
few defi nitions:

• 

• 

• 

• 

 are slices in the skin that have a 

incision is a similar wound but has clean 

Lacerations
rough edge.
An 
edges.
Punctures
can penetrate quite far into the fl esh.
 are wounds in which a fl ap of skin 
Avulsions
or fl esh is partially separated from the fl esh 
beneath it.

 typically have small openings but 

 To treat open wounds:

1. If possible, have the skin around the 
wound disinfected with iodine, alcohol, or 
warm, soapy water.

2. Except for punctures, open the wound, 
and irrigate it with sterile water. Remove 
any foreign material.

3. Triple antibiotic ointment is applied to the 
wound, which is then covered with a ster-
ile dressing.

 This is simple enough if it is as described 
above—a nonbleeding wound with a patient, 
patient. If there is profuse bleeding, then direct 
pressure with a sterile dressing is called for with 
the wound elevated above the heart, if possible. 
In my experience, it is a good idea, if you are tend-
ing someone other than yourself, to have the vic-
tim apply the pressure. This frees you up to 
prepare sterile water and bandages and arrange 
for help.
 When I have been unable to get medical atten-
tion for a few days or more aft er suff ering an 
injury, I made sure that the top of the wound 
stayed open so as to allow any weeping or pus to 
fl ow out of the wound and not get trapped inside 
by a healed-over opening. I deal with shallow, 
infected wounds by chewing the young leaves of 
broadleaf plantain to a pulp (very bitter) and 
applying it as a poultice to the wound. Left there 
for a few hours, it does wonders.

Splinters

Splinters can be an annoyance or a more serious 
problem depending on how deep and how large 
they are and what’s on them. One danger is that a 

 
 
 
 
MEDIC AL EMERGENCIE S 

87

splinter can introduce foreign material, in addi-
tion to itself, deep into the fl esh. Deep, infected 
wounds are tricky, because oft en the entry heals 
closed and leaves a festering mess inside that can 
quickly become very dangerous. Th e approaches I 
use if the splinter is too deep to grab with twee-
zers or fi ngernails are to let it sit for a few days 
and then soak the area in water, warm if possible, 
and then reopen the entry site. I will then squeeze 
from two sides, and the little bit of pus that has 
appeared will oft en eject the splinter partially or 
all the way as it is forced out. If you consider your 
choices, they are, quite simply, to either leave the 
splinter in or remove it. Either way, seek medical 
treatment at the earliest possible time. 

Burns

Burns can be a common occurrence for people 
who are not accustomed to using fi re for their 
daily living needs. When you are tired and/or 
cold, errors in judgment and clumsiness increase 
and can result in an injury. During one of the epi-
sodes of the Survivor television show, one of the 
contestants was blowing on the campfi re, and, 
through a combination of hyperventilation and 
smoke inhalation, he lost consciousness and fell 
into the fi re. He was only out for seconds, but 
when he came to, his hands were burned and fl esh 
could be seen hanging off of them. He was trans-
ported by medevac and did not return.
 Th ere are three classifi cations for burns.

• 

• 

First-degree
 burns are superfi cial, causing 
redness and some puffi ness, like sunburn, and 
there are no blisters.
Second-degree burns
, or partial-thickness 
burns, aff ect the skin down into the inner 

• 

layer of skin. Blisters are present, and pain can 
be moderate to severe.
 are the 
Th ird-degree or full-thickness burns
most serious, as they extend from the surface 
down through the skin and into the underly-
ing fl esh and fat. Th e skin is discolored and 
has a grilled appearance to it.

 Th e greater the surface area of a burn, the 
more severe it is. Th ird-degree burns do not hurt 
as much as lesser burns because the nerve end-
ings have also been burned. However, the sur-
rounding areas may be intensely painful due to 
fi rst- and second-degree burns.
 Most burns encountered around camp life are 
minor, such as stepping on coals with bare feet, 
grabbing something hot and blistering your fi n-
gertips, and singeing your eyebrows and hair. For 
situations involving more serious burns, such as 
those covering the hands or what might be sus-
tained in a shelter fi re, you or someone in your 
party need to get advanced medical help. Smaller 
burns can be dealt with in the following manner.
 To treat burns:

1. Stop the burn and pour water on the burn.
2. Cover the burn with cloth and pour water 
over it frequently, or submerge it in water. 
Th e faster it gets cool and the longer it 
stays cool, the better off the victim will be.

 Keep the burn clean and do not pop blisters or 
apply any oily ointment. Aloe vera gel or juice 
from the plant are great on fi rst- and second-
degree burns and provide immediate relief, but it 
needs to be reapplied oft en.
 Th e best relief in my experience has been sub-
mersion in cold water. Not only does this relieve 

 
 
 
8 8 

SE V EN-DAY SURV IVAL

pain, it can also reduce the overall outcome. I 
once grabbed a piece of clayware just out of fi ring, 
having confused it with a previously fi red piece. 
My skin hissed and I set the clayware down 
promptly. I could see where it had contacted my 
hand and fi ngers and knew that it wasn’t good, 

but aft er soaking my hand in 60°F, fl owing water 
for half an hour, the pain stopped and came back 
only briefl y aft er I took my hand out of the water. 
Th e blisters that had started to form went down, 
and a day later there was no sign of any injury, 
either visually or to my touch.

 
P A R T I I

BEYOND SURVIVAL

PRIMITIVE SKILLS FOR WILDERNESS LIVING

This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 7

SHELTERS FOR THE 
LONG TERM

The shelters covered here are not practical for 

short-term survival, because they require more 
work, time, and/or materials than the expedient 
shelters discussed in Chapter 2, but they can also 
be drier, warmer, more spacious, more conve-
nient, and more pleasant overall. If you plan an 
extended stay in the wilderness, the extra eff ort 
may be well worthwhile.

PIT SHELTERS

Just as digging into the snow is sometimes the 
best option in fi nding shelter, occasionally dig-
ging into the soil or sand is the best way to fi nd 
protection from the elements. Typically, an earth-
type shelter requires too much work to meet the 
needs of a short-term situation. The point to 
remember is that you never know when a short-
term delay turns into an extended survival situa-
tion. I would rather leave a perfect shelter unslept 
in because of an early rescue than have no shelter 
to sleep in due to the lack of an expected rescue.
 As with all shelters, the key is a good location. 
In this case, that means plenty of wood and 
grasses for the roof, the insulation and the bed-
ding, and diggable soil. In areas of sandy ground 

91

or other loose or easily dug substrates, a pit shelter 
can be fairly easily constructed with a little more 
eff ort than some other shelters require. Sand is by 
far the best substrate in which to make these shel-
ters provided it is not too loose and dry. It pro-
vides easy digging and good drainage, which 
means less issue with rot, and it is easy to camou-
fl age. I once made a pit shelter in an area with too 
much clay that initially posed no problems other 
than the impractical amount of energy required 
to dig it. Aft er a good rain, however, it turned into 
a sensory deprivation tank—it was dark, quiet, 
and full of water! Other spots had so many large 
stones that I dug as far as I was able and then 
made up the diff erence with log “walls” on the 
surface, around the pit—harder to hide, but defi -
nitely manageable.

Building a Pit Shelter

Locate a safe area as described in Chapter 2. 
Unless you have a replenishable food and water 
source, avoid exerting too much energy in build-
ing this shelter. If you really need it make sure 
that the ground is easy to excavate with a digging 
stick or other improvised item. To reiterate safety 
issues, critters may fi nd their way into your pit 
and like it there. Scorpions are easy to miss and 

92 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

can make sleeping diffi cult. Other good locations 
are found in coastal areas with plenty of sandy 
substrate and next to no risk of fl ooding.
 Mark out the shelter plan by marking your 
shoulder width, plus two hand lengths, and the 
length of at least your body, plus two heads. Th e 
depth should be about that of your inseam. Dig-
ging without a shovel in any substrate is tough, so 
start by loosening the area in which you will be 
excavating with a digging stick (see Chapter 16), 
and then remove the loosened material by scrap-
ing with a fl at stone or piece of wood. I use my 
hands, but be leery of this, because if you wound 
yourself, it can be dangerous once infection sets 
in. Pile the diggings along either side of the pit 
about eighteen inches away to prevent them from 
inadvertently getting kicked back into the hole. 
Th is material will be used later to cover the roof.
 Th ere are a few entrance options. Th e most 
practical is a ramp entrance that leaves from the 
shelter at the head, perpendicular to the pit. Th is 
doorway minimizes the amount of dirt that will 
enter your bedding with each entry and exit. 
Another option is to not have any ramp, and to 
make the end of the entry pit farthest from your 
head deeper than the shelter. Th is will ensure that 
any rainwater will not fl ow into your sleeping 
area.

Lie down in your pit and see how (un)com-

fortable it is, and make adjustments.
 Once the pit is dug, the hole needs to be exca-
vated at least six inches wider all the way around 
to a depth of six inches. Th is is the shelf that will 
support the roof pieces and the dirt that will cover 
and insulate the shelter; therefore, it needs to be 
wide enough to support a lot of weight. In other 
words, if the shelf is only two inches wide, the 
weight of the sticks and roof may cause the wall 
below the shelf to buckle and crumble. Sometimes 

Cross section of pit shelter

Entry pit with water well

Pit showing shelf and partial roof

 
 
SHE LT E R S F O R T H E LO N G T E R M 

93

tion, you need to think carefully about the loca-
tion; i.e., does the surrounding landscape direct 
passersby away from or toward your shelter?
 When you are excavating the pit, it is a good 
idea to temporarily remove the natural ground 
litter (leaves, sticks, grasses, small plants) from 
the area where you will deposit the diggings 
unless you have a tarp. Th is will prevent freshly 
dug dirt from being clearly visible on top of the 
ground cover.
 Make the support shelf lower to accommodate 
the following door: When you are covering the pit 
with logs, leave a section with no covering to one 
side of the middle of the pit. Make sure that it is 
just large enough for you to enter the pit feet fi rst 
before proceeding. Add sticks, log-cabin style, 
around the opening (fi rst perpendicular to the 
rest of the roof logs, then parallel to them). As you 
build up to grade, make the entry so that it looks 
similar to a funnel or like it would hold an 
inverted pyramid. Continue the building process 
as above with the grass and the dirt. For the door, 
you will need a basket that sits in the opening 
without falling into the shelter. Th e basket should 
be lined with grass, fi lled with sand, and sprin-
kled with the local ground cover. Leave two han-
dles accessible that are well attached to the basket. 
Th e rest of the shelter and any disturbed ground 
can also be covered with the leaves and other 
materials you scraped together prior to begin-
ning. A rain will always help the scene blend in 
better.

I have skipped the shelf altogether, but it took a lot 
of sand to really seal the place up. Th e choice is 
yours.
 Gather loads of grasses, inner bark, leaves, or 
other insulation materials and lots of sticks and 
logs for the roof. Th e wood for the roof, if you plan 
to leave the shelter up for any length of time, 
should be hardwood like Osage orange, locust, or 
oak. Other woods work well, too, although I stay 
away from American hornbeam, ironwood, and 
any birches, because they rot very quickly when 
they are kept moist by soil. (I saw an earth shelter 
built using ironwood; a year later, it was a heap of 
dirt and rotten wood.) Sand drains far better than 
soil and thus will not hold moisture next to the 
wood for as long of a time, which helps the wood 
last longer. If you have a choice, however, go with 
the harder stuff . 

Place the sticks across the pit, making sure 
that they have plenty of length on both support 
shelves. Th e entry ramp can be covered, but leave 
enough space to allow easy entry to and exit from 
the shelter. Cover the stick roof with grass and 
then with the excavated material. Lastly, pack in 
the bedding and insulation, leaving a large bundle 
to pull in, aft er your feet-fi rst entry, as a door 
plug.

Sometimes combining the pit shelter with a 
wikiup or other shelter type works well. A dug-in 
base with a debris or thatch roof will help keep a 
shelter cooler than the ambient temperature in 
hot weather and warmer than the ambient tem-
perature in cold weather due to the insulating 
qualities of the soil.

Keeping It Hidden

Th e following options are best for shelters that 
you wish to remain secret. If this is your inten-

Cross section of a conical door hole

 
 
 
9 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Basket plug

arachnids, ants, or anything else that likes cool, 
dark places in your area, you may have to evict 
them carefully. I oft en make a fi re outside the 
shelter. Th en, when I have some good coals, I’ll 
throw a heap inside on the earthen floor and 
cover them with leaf litter or other organic mate-
rial to get lots of smoke. Creating an opening at 
the foot of the shelter can help get smoke and heat 
to really saturate the inside. Th is also deodorizes, 
preheats, and dries the interior. Do not do this 
just before stuffi ng the pit with insulation, for 
obvious reasons.

 Another door option is to make a disk by 
bending green branches into a hoop and lashing 
them with cordage or twisting them around 
themselves. Waterproofi ng can be attained with 
grasses, bark, leaves, clay, or a combination of any 
of the above.

Upkeep

Maintaining your shelter is important, especially 
if you want it to last for repeat use. I remove bed-
ding and insulation when I plan on being away 
for more than a few weeks. Th is prevents mold 
and makes drying it out with a small fi re much 
easier upon my return. Th e logs used in the con-
struction of the roof are important, especially in 
soils that can hold water, because rot can require 
them to be replaced inside a year. Th e door cover, 
if you are using a basket-type entry, should be 
removed and replaced with sturdy sticks, as the 
baskets tend to thin out and drop into the shelter 
as a result of gravity and moisture.
 When you are reopening a pit shelter aft er an 
extended absence, be cautious—many a small, 
pointy critter will be right at home in your home 
away from home. If you have poisonous reptiles, 

THATCHED HUTS

Th atching has fascinated me for some time. How 
can it be that natural materials still in their raw 
state can be such an eff ective covering for build-
ings that many a modern island or coastal busi-
ness or dwelling sports a thatched roof? Sure, 
some of them have a “proper” roof beneath with 
the thatch just for looks, but many do not. Aft er 
watching a team of thatchers work on a roof in 
southern Mexico my attitude toward it as a sur-
vival tool cooled. I felt that thatching sounded 
great until I understood the amount of cordage or 
string that was needed. So, if you have a few thou-
sand feet of spare cordage, by all means, go thatch 
a hut! Joking aside, thatching can provide a great 
shelter and a fi ne area in which to work. Aft er 
much thought and mucking about with thatch-
ing, I came up with an idea that reduced the 
amount of cordage required by about 75 percent 
or more. I later learned that, as is the case with 
many “inventions” regarding primitive skills, the 
idea was not only old, but documented and pho-
tographed. I call it the split and pinch method.

 
SHE LT E R S F O R T H E LO N G T E R M 

9 5

 Th atched huts are practical when an extended 
stay is expected and you have plenty of building 
materials on hand for the structure. However, you 
also must be in an area that will support you in all 
of your other needs as well. Th ree methods of 
attaching the thatch to the frame are covered 
below.

The Frame

Many considerations must be addressed prior to 
your grabbing the fi rst stick. Figure out the gen-
eral design and how you intend to utilize the 
space.
 Th e two designs with which I am most famil-
iar are the longhouse style (vertical walls, curved 
roof) and the dome style. My fi rst round thatched 
hut (better for windy areas) was large enough to 
house a few people but was so tall that I wasted 
considerable amounts of materials and heat to 
have air above my head inside. Th e advantage to 
all that air space was in the storage department. 
Plus, I used the hut with an interior fi re for two 
years before I burned it to the ground. Another 
roof option—more labor intensive but far more 
sound—is to put a peaked, A-frame roof on the 
structure. Th is provides a better pitch for shed-
ding water.
 Use your body as a way to measure out sleep-
ing areas for all people who will use the hut, and 
fi gure in work space, some of which can serve 
double duty as both sleeping and work areas. 
Most people can sleep in a space that is two feet 
by six feet, and it is the sleeping space that needs 
the most protection from the elements. If you are 
building round huts for a number of people, it 
seems best to build one for sleeping quarters and 
another for a work space. In this way, there is no 
need for a tall and spacious structure and, if you 

Bird’s-eye view of two frames

View of the longhouse frame

View of the dome-style frame

 
9 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

do burn it down, at least you’ll still have a place to 
sleep! (For more on round huts, see “Desert Shel-
ters” in Chapter 2).
 Native peoples used fi re inside thatched huts, 
but this can be tricky—if not outright danger-
ous—given the fl ammable nature of thatching. I 
suggest that an outside fi re area be used away 
from the shelter. If you must have an inside fi re-
place, be sure to have ample room around it, and 
make a smoke hole in the roof above it. Parge the 
inside of the thatching near the smoke-hole open-
ing (i.e., cover it with a fi re-resistant coating by 
smearing on a wet clay or a mixture of clay and 
grass mixed in a 75:25 ratio). Keeping the fi re to a 
small size is wise, too.
 With longhouses and thatch huts, a space can 
be left in the gable ends. Th is allows the smoke to 
rise to the ceiling and be carried away by a cross 
draft ; it also avoids compromising the integrity of 
the roof. However, it makes warming the interior 
next to impossible unless the openings are kept 
small.
 Whatever your fl oor plan, mark out on the 
ground the shape of the structure and where the 
posts will go. Mark the corners of the shelter, and 
make a mark where the walls will be every three 
to four feet for uprights.
 Harvest all the saplings you will need for 
crosspieces and posts. Poles can be fresh cut or 
seasoned (green wood is more fl exible). Either 
way, they should be of a hardy, rot-resistant wood 
like cedar, Osage orange, or locust. Oak stands up 
quite well, as does ash. Avoid using birches, iron-
wood, hornbeam, and soft er woods. Th ese may be 
hard when they are upright, but they turn into 
sponges in the ground and rot with alarming 
speed. For the longhouse style, use thicker mate-
rial—two to four inches for posts and about one 
to two inches for the crossbars (measurements are 

from the base of the saplings to be used). For the 
dome style, use thinner stock—two inches for the 
posts and one inch for the crossbars. If you want 
your shelter to stand up to snow, you will need to 
use thicker materials, provide cross bracing in the 
more horizontal surfaces, and potentially add 
more interior support for the winter.
 One method to anchor the uprights is to 
pound a three-foot hardwood stake halfway into 
the ground at each corner and each wall-post 
mark. Work the stake around until it is possible 
to remove it from the ground, or continue work-
ing the stake until the post will fi t in the resulting 
hole.
 Another method is to pound three-foot stakes 
halfway into the ground at each post site and leave 
them there, then lash saplings, thick end down, to 
each protruding stake. Th is way oft en seems eas-
ier if you have modern cutting tools, although I 
prefer the fi rst method.
 Aft er you have anchored the uprights by either 
method, bend the opposing saplings toward each 
other, overlapping them until you obtain the 
desired height in the hut. Lash them together or 
wrap them around one another to hold them in 
place. At this point, thinking about symmetry 
will just irritate you, so don’t waste your time try-
ing to make it look perfect. Th at will come later . . . 
maybe.

In Practicing Primitive (2004), Steven M. 
Watts describes how he prefabricated the arches 
by laying the saplings for a given arch on the 
ground, thin end to thin end, with the ends over-
lapping by three feet or more. (Marks or pegs can 
be stuck in the ground to ensure that all arches 
are the same length.) Then he lashed them 
together, dropped one end into its hole, and bent 
the arch until the opposite end could be placed in 
its hole.

 
 
SHE LT E R S F O R T H E LO N G T E R M 

97

 Next, attach crosspieces between the uprights. 
Place the fi rst one at ground level and additional 
ones at least every three feet. Actual spacing will 
depend on the length of your thatching material, 
which I’ll discuss soon. Cordage is the best way to 
attach the crosspieces. (See Chapter 15 to learn 
how to make cordage.) If cordage is in short sup-
ply, there are other methods. 

For the vertical portion of the walls, “Y” sticks 
can be pounded into the ground alongside the 
uprights and the crosspieces rested in them. 
Another option is, if you have access to long sap-
lings or your uprights are close together, to weave 
the crosspieces through the uprights as if you 
were making a basket. It sure makes for an ugly 
duckling that will, unfortunately, never be beauti-
ful. If the shelter begins to sag under the weight of 
the crosspieces, the saplings you used for uprights 
were far too slight and must be replaced or rein-
forced with a vertical post inside. A Y-shaped 
stick is ideal.

Thatching

Once the crosspieces are in place and the uprights 
are reinforced (if necessary), the structure is ready 
for its skin. Here are three thatching techniques. 
Each one has advantages and disadvantages.

B U N D L E T H ATC H . Probably the most common way 
to thatch a structure is to prepare bundles of the 
thatching materials by tying the thin ends of the 
grass, straw, or whatever is to be used together. 
Beginning at the second lowest crosspiece and 
working horizontally these bundles are tied 
tightly next to each other all the way around the 
structure before you move up to the next cross-
piece. Th e second row as well as each subsequent 
row must overlap the preceding row by a good six 
to eight inches, if not by more, to ensure good 
weatherproofi ng. While the technique requires 
much cordage, it is widely used and has been for 
some time.

Detail of skeleton and framing

Thatching attached to the crosspiece

 
 
9 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

P I N C H T H ATC H . Th is method works especially well 
for fl at-walled structures or those that have very 
little horizontal curve. Longhouse-styled struc-
tures can also use this on the roof, although a 
thick layer is required to prevent leakage. Th is is a 
good option for peaked, A-frame roofs. Th is pro-
vides a better pitch for shedding water.
 Use either very straight saplings or split them 
lengthwise and keep the halves paired. Place one-
half, split side up, on the ground, and put on your 
thatching material (I prefer cattail because of its 
abundance) perpendicular to it and evenly, with 
the thick end extending eight inches beyond the 
sapling.

Place the second half of the sapling on top of 
the thatching over the fi rst half, and bind it every 
two feet or so. If some of the thatching seems 
loose, simply tug it downward until its increased 
diameter causes it to snug up. If you are using 
green materials, shrinkage will occur as they dry; 
the larger ends, however, will help keep the mate-
rials in place. Even so, be sure to cinch the cord-
age very tightly. Th ese “thatch mats” can then be 

Cattail thatch pinched between sapling pieces

attached to the shelter in the same manner in 
which siding or shingles are put on a house. Start 
low and work your way up. Make sure to overlap 
each row. With cattails used upside down, it is a 
good idea to overlap them well beyond the six to 
eight inches recommended due to their irregular 
length and rather wispy tops. When I measure 
the overlap, I measure only the thatch that extends 
below the previously placed crosspiece. This 
ensures that the integrity of the walls is not com-
promised by snugging down the thatch. If the 
mats are too thin or the pitch too slight, their abil-
ity to shed water is diminished.

B E N D T H ATCH . Th is method is well suited to round 
or domed shelters. It requires a minimal amount 
of cordage but a great quantity of thatching mate-
rial if a waterproof shelter is the goal.
 Cattails or tules (a type of bullrush) are draped 
over a crosspiece (the crosspiece must be less than 
half the length of the cattail or tule off the 
ground). Th e half of the cattail falling on the 
inside of the shelter is run on the outside of all 
crosspieces below the one on which it rests. Th is 
keeps it from hanging into the interior of the shel-
ter. It does not seem to make any real diff erence 
whether the tops of the cattail fall inside or out-
side, because they both end up making up the 
wall. Once all of the thatch is in place, thin, fl exi-
ble saplings or branches need to be wrapped in 
hoops around the shelter just above the ends of 
the thatch. Th is prevents the wind from whipping 
it around. If a smoke hole is left in the top, an 
inner hoop may need to be lashed on the inside of 
the roof surrounding the opening.

 
 
SHE LT E R S F O R T H E LO N G T E R M 

9 9

Cross section of thatch application

Inner hoop holding up the thatch

More Thatch Hut Tips

•

Doors should be kept small to reduce drafti-

particularly rainy area, you may ﬁ nd that a tipi-

ness and heat loss. Be creative—add awnings, 

style frame works better than a dome.

make mats on which to sit and sleep, and make 

•

People usually build their hut too large; the 

the amenities you want to have so that you 

amount of space that a person actually needs 

can enjoy your stay.

is pretty small. Sleeping and work areas make 

•

When you ﬁ nd a leak, don’t get mad—ﬁ gure it 

up the bulk of your spatial needs. If you intend 

out. Break it down. Where is the water coming 

on staying for a few months or longer, remem-

from? Where is it entering from the outside? 

ber that you can always extend the length of 

What needs to happen to stop it?

the shelter, add awnings, or build other shel-

•

The steeper the shelter, the better it will pre-

ters (smaller or bigger).

vent rainwater from entering. If you live in a 

 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 8

FIR E-MAKING TOO LS

Primitive fi re-making methods, while fun and 

eff ective, are skills that can largely be passed over 
for the short-term survival situation. A cigarette 
lighter is small, light, and cheap, is easily stowed 
in any pocket, and is quicker and more reliable (as 
long as the fuel holds out) at producing a fl ame 
with which to ignite tinder. (See Chapter 4 for 
basic information about fi re building.) For longer-
term situations, however, the ability to make your 
fi re from the surrounding materials is liberating 
and a great skill to have. Yes, a fi re can be tended 
and the coals protected, but when that drenching 
rain comes and shuts your fi re down, it is nice to 
know that you can coax fi re from the wood in 
your area. Th is chapter covers four fi re-making 
tools: the bow drill, hand drill, fi re saw, and fi re 
plow, in addition to the “long match”—a method 
for preserving and carrying fi re. Th e pump drill, 
covered under “Hand Tools” in Chapter 16, is 
another tool that can be used to start fi res, as well 
as for drilling holes.

BOW DRILL

I have been told that trees are made of stored sun-
shine. I believe that natural fi re making is a way 

101

of asking the sunshine to release itself, and only 
asking in a humble way will draw the desired 
results. Th e bow drill is one such method. Here I 
can provide you with the technical directions for 
this fi re-making ceremony; the humility must 
come from you.
 Th e apparatus is made up of fi ve components: 
the fi reboard, the spindle, the cordage, the bow, 
and the handhold. With the fi reboard placed on 
the ground, the spindle wound once in the cord-
age, and the ends placed in the sockets of the fi re-
board and the handhold, the bow is moved back 
and forth parallel to the ground. Th e bow strokes 
rotate the spindle in the sockets via the cordage. 
Simultaneously, downward pressure is applied on 
the handhold, creating friction on both ends of 
the spindle. Conifer pitch or needles placed in the 
handhold socket minimize friction at the top, 
which also results in a greater amount of heat-
generating friction in the fi reboard socket. As the 
spindle moves within the fi reboard socket, small 
particles of wood wear off and fi ll the notch with 
fi ne powder (fi re powder). Th is fi ne powder is 
dark brown or black in color and, due to its 
intense heat, gloms together and forms a coal. Th e 
coal is then removed from the notch and placed 
in a tinder bundle. Th e bundle is blown into a 
fl ame and put into a prebuilt tipi fi re.

102 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Hand hold

Bow

Spindle (Drill)

Cordage

Notch & Socket

Fireboard

The bow drill

hardwoods will use up your valuable energy. And 
third, making cordage that can withstand such 
continuous use required for an oak bow-and-drill 
fi re is diffi cult. Woods such as white cedar, juni-
per cedar, cottonwood, aspen, sycamore, maple, 
birch, and basswood work beautifully for the bow 
and drill; though some of these are classifi ed as 
hardwoods, they are from the soft er end of the 
hardwood spectrum.

Each tree, however, is diff erent, and the hard-
ness of wood may vary from branch to branch. 
An aspen growing with one side to a cliff and one 
side in the open will give you very hard wood on 
the cliff side and much soft er wood on the exposed 
side. I strongly recommend experimenting. When 
you are harvesting bow-and-drill wood, it is best 
to fi nd a dead branch that is still in the tree. A 
branch on the ground can feel dry, yet be moist 
inside due to absorption of moisture from the 
ground. A branch in a tree is surrounded by air, 

Spindle rotation

Making the Components

It is possible to make a bow-and-drill fi re with 
any nonresinous wood. Working with the harder 
hardwoods such as oak, locust, ironwood, and 
others is a fun challenge but not desirable in a 
survival situation for the following reasons: First, 
such hardwoods take more time and energy to 
fashion into a bow-and-drill set. Second, the 
endurance required to make a coal with these 

 
 
and the wind helps to evaporate moisture quickly 
even aft er a good rain.

For instructions on making the bow string, 
see Chapter 15. All of the other components are 
described below.
 Th e bow should be about waist height and 
have a very slight curve. I prefer a bow with some 
fl exibility, although this is not imperative. Keep 
the bow light, as a heavy bow will require more 
energy to move back and forth. Th e diameter 
should be between a nickel and a quarter in size. 
One end should fi t comfortably in your dominant 
hand. Notch the bow ends to help hold the string 
in place.

I prefer spindles that are nine inches in length 
and the diameter of a quarter, although in damp 
weather I’ll use a wider spindle to create greater 
friction between the fi reboard and the spindle. 
Th is helps dry the wood and thus the fi bers that 
fall into the notch. Th e spindle can be taken from 
a dead branch with the desired diameter or split 
from a log and carved into a round shape. Both 
ends should be tapered bluntly. The spindle 
should be of the same wood as the fi reboard or of 
a similar hardness.
 Th e length of the fi reboard is less important 
than its width. I typically use a piece that is nine 
inches by three or four inches. Th e thickness of 
the board should be about one inch but no more. 

FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

103

As with the spindle, the wood can be split from a 
log or taken from a dead tree branch. A fi reboard 
made from a dead branch will likely be narrower 
than three inches in diameter and should be split 
lengthwise to create a fl at bottom. If you’re using 
rocks to make your apparatus, you will need to 
crush the branch with a larger stone and use the 
sharp edge of a rock to abrade your notch when 
you are ready.
 A handhold made of pine oft en does not need 
to be lubricated, because it has a residual pitch 
still in the wood. In areas where there are no coni-
fers, a bone or stone handhold works well, 
although it may take more preparation if you can’t 
locate one with a pocket for the spindle end. Th e 
key aspects of a handhold are that the socket is 
deep enough to hold the spindle well, yet not so 
deep as to create more friction when the spindle 
sides contact the socket wall. The handhold 
should be comfortable in your left hand if you are 
right-handed (the opposite if you are left -handed), 
and the hole for the spindle should be directly 
below the center of your palm. Make sure that it is 
large enough so that you can hold it without 
touching the spindle. If it’s too small, your fi ngers 
may touch the spindle and suff er burns.
 To mark the socket location in your handhold 
and fi reboard, lay the spindle on top of the fi re-
board, fl ush with either long edge. Roll the spin-
dle toward the center of the fi reboard a quarter 
inch and stand it up on its point. Twist the spindle 

Not good

Better

Better still

A

B

Spindle tips

Marking the socket location

 
 
 
10 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

back and forth, creating a small dent in the fi re-
board. With the handhold end of the spindle, cre-
ate a small dent in the middle of the handhold, as 
described above.
 Tie cordage to both ends of the bow, being 
careful not to make it tight. Exactly how much 
slack is required will depend upon the diameter 
of the spindle. Place one end of the bow under 
your right armpit, with the rest of the bow out in 
front of you. With the spindle in your right hand, 
place it across the cordage (step A in the accom-
panying fi gure). Swoop under and around the 
cordage with the end of the spindle (step B), and 
with both hands, force the spindle to a perpen-
dicular position with the cordage (step C). Hold 
the cordage and spindle fi rmly, because the spin-
dle is held under tension and could fl y out. Note: 
if the cordage is too tight (you can’t complete step 
C) or too loose after completing step C, then 
adjust the cordage and try again.

Place the fi reboard on the ground, with the 
small hole that you started on the right end. With 
the ball of your left foot resting on the fi reboard 
to the left of the hole, drop down to your right 
knee and place the spindle tip into the hole in the 
fi reboard. While you continue to hold the spindle 

to keep it from being fl ung out by the cordage, 
place the handhold on the top so that the point of 
the spindle rests in the handhold starter hole. At 
this point, you should be resting your chest on 
your left knee. Your left wrist should be brought 
against your shin while you exert downward pres-
sure on the handhold. Grasp the end of the bow 
in your right hand, and begin moving it back and 
forth so that the spindle rotates. In all likelihood, 
the spindle will pop out with annoying frequency 
and the cordage will ride up and down the spindle 
and come off . Th is is due to a lack of form and 
occurs when the spindle is not kept perpendicular 
to the cordage or the handhold. I really “lock my 
hand in” by pulling the wrist joint back against 
my shin so that both my hand and arm are stable. 
Th is keeps the spindle perpendicular to the fi re-
board and handhold. Th e cordage can be kept in 
the center of the spindle by giving even, level bow 
strokes.
 A trick for helping with this is on the back-
stroke, when your bow hand is passing your knee. 
Try to drive the back end of the bow into the 
ground a foot or so behind your knee, paying 
attention to the eff ect this has on your bow wrist. 
Do the opposite on the forestroke. By using full 

A

B

C

Stringing the spindle

 
 
FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

10 5

Bow drill position

bow strokes (i.e., all of the string, not six-inch 
strokes), and by adding more or less downward 
pressure in the handhold, you will produce 
enough friction to cause the sockets to smoke. As 
you play with the speed of the strokes, more or 
less smoke will be generated. Th is burning-in 
process is generally done until the sockets have 
the same diameter as the spindle.
 Th e handhold socket is now ready for some 
lubricant. Conifer needles work beautifully, as 
does the sap, and, as mentioned previously, a 
handhold made of pine may contain enough resin 
so as not to need any additional lubricant. Oils 
from animal fats also work.

Put a few pine needles in the socket, and force-
fully twist the spindle end in the socket, smashing 
and smearing the needles around. Aft er you have 
lubricated the handhold, mark your spindle so 
that you can tell which end is up. If the lubricated 
end is used in the fi reboard, getting a fi re may 
prove to be rather diffi cult.
 To carve your notch in the fi reboard, look at 
the burned-in socket and imagine that it is a 
whole pie. Your notch should be no greater than 
one-eighth of the pie. It is important that it be 
wedge shaped and clean on the sides. It should go 
into but not include the center of the socket.

Using the Bow Drill

Now you are ready to create a coal. Tinder (see 
Chapter 4) can be placed either under the fi re-
board and notch or set aside, and a wood chip or 
leaf can be placed under the notch to catch the 
coal. Begin with smooth, even strokes, and watch 

The notch in the ﬁ reboard

 
 
10 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Moving the ﬁ reboard

the dust build up in the notch. Th e goal is to have 
fi ne dark brown or black dust. Light brown or 
white dust means that you have not used enough 
speed. Coarse brown dust is asking for less hand-
hold pressure, and no dust at all and loud squeak-
ing indicate fire hardening and require an 
increase in both speed and pressure.
 When the notch is full and a lot of smoke has 
been coming from the fi reboard, add ten good 
strokes to “pack” the coal. Th ese packing strokes 
ensure that the coal has enough material to feed 
on as it grows. Stop your bow strokes, and gently 
remove the spindle from the fi reboard. A wisp of 
smoke should be rising from the dust in the 
wedge. Place a twig or the back of your knife blade 
gently on the dust and hold it there. Roll the fi re-
board away from the dust, leaving the coal in the 
open. If the smoke is weak, leave it alone for a 
minute or so; the coal may grow.
 Gently deposit the coal into your prepared 
tinder bundle, and fold the tinder over it. I like to 
let the coal heat up the tinder a little before I give 
a few long, soft breaths into the bundle. Holding 
the tinder up to the sky is a good idea. Not only is 
it a great way to give thanks, but also it prevents 
the coal from burning a hole out the back of your 

bundle and dropping to the ground. It also keeps 
the smoke out of your face. When the smoke 
builds into a good billowing cloud, you can put it 
in your tipi fi re and blow it into fl ame then, or you 
can do so in your hand and quickly transfer it to 
the fi re. Once the bundle is in place, you may need 
to give it a few breaths to really get it going.

So, good luck, and work through the frustra-
tions. Sometimes it is a good idea to take a break 
and set the bow and drill aside for a few days 
before going at it again.

HAND DRILL

Th e hand drill is a comparatively simple fi re-
making tool, at least in theory. Like the bow-and-
drill method, it uses the same components, but 
they are of diff erent dimensions. And, rather than 
using a bow and a handhold, your hands are used 
to both rotate the spindle and apply downward 
pressure.
 A spindle has one end placed in a notched, 
round indentation or socket near the edge of a 
fi reboard. Th e spindle is then rotated by moving 

 
 
FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

107

one hand forward while moving the other one 
back and simultaneously applying downward 
pressure. Typically, your hands will shortly end 
up at the base of the spindle and must quickly be 
returned to the top for another run unless fl oat-
ing has been mastered (a technique I will get into 
later). Th is procedure is continued until plenty of 
smoke emanates from the socket and fi re powder 
(black powder worn off of the fi reboard and spin-
dle due to friction) has fi lled the notch to capacity 
and beyond. From here, it is a matter of transfer-
ring the coal to the tinder, as described in the 
“Bow Drill” section of this chapter.

I remember when my friends and I discovered 
the hand drill. Th e excitement was strong and the 
desire to outdo one another stronger. I also 
remember very consciously deciding to shelve the 
thing when I saw the full palm and fi nger blisters 
my friends were sporting. No thank you. I fi g-
ured, watch them, let them fi gure it out, and when 
they got it nailed, swoop in and copy the tech-
nique that works! Six months later, aft er watch-
ing, practicing in my head, moving my hands 
together in a somewhat circular manner, and 
keeping my fi ngerprints, I got a fi re with rather 
little eff ort. Th e lesson here is that technique, not 
calluses or brute strength, is the key.

Components

For the spindle, fi nd a straight, dry, pithy stalk or 
soft wood stick from pencil thickness to that of a 
nickel and from about four to eighteen inches in 
length. Th inner and longer sizes tend to be easier 
for beginners. Experiment with soft woods and 
pithy plants in your area, such as:

• 
• 

Goldenrod
Burdock

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Willow
Cattail
Cedar
Yucca
Mullein

Fireboards should be made from soft wood 
like poplar or cedar and can be made quite easily 
from a dry, dead branch crushed between two 
stones or otherwise split. To make the socket in 
the fi reboard, stand the spindle on end near an 
edge and score the circumference. Th en, simply 
split out enough of the socket to create a lip that is 
suffi cient enough to keep the spindle in the socket 
(one-sixteenth inch). Th e socket is notched such 
that if it were a pie, a slice of about one-eighth 
would be removed. Th e notch is carved or abraded 
from the edge of the fi reboard to, but not includ-
ing, the center of the socket.

Making Fire

With the tip of the spindle in the socket place 
your hands palm to palm, sandwiching the spin-
dle between them. Th e action of moving your 
right hand forward while moving your left hand 
backward, then reversing the motion, rotates the 
spindle. Doing that hand action while also apply-
ing downward pressure is what provides adequate 
friction to generate a coal. Unfortunately, this 
process also causes your hands to work their way 
down the spindle to the fi reboard. At this point, 
you must quickly move your hands to the top of 
the spindle again without allowing the spindle to 
come out of the socket or remain still too long 
and cause signifi cant cooling. Quite a trick for the 
beginner. A spindle of eighteen inches or so is 
preferable for folks who are just getting the hang 
of it.

 
 
 
10 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Floating is a technique in which downward 
pressure can be applied without moving your 
hands down the spindle. In fact, with practice, 
downward pressure can be applied while you 
move your hands up the spindle.

Imagine that the spindle rises through the 
center of an inverted rainbow or arc. When you 

move one hand forward and the other backward, 
make sure that both hands follow the line of the 
arc as they move in opposite directions. This 
allows downward pressure to be applied while the 
hands retain their location on, or ride up, the 
rotating spindle.

Hand drill posture

Hand drill showing ﬂ oating

 
 
 
Hand Drill Tips

•

I begin by ﬂ oating until I get good smoke and 

have plenty of dust in the notch, because 

ﬂ oating is less labor intensive. Then a few 

quick bursts down the spindle will usually gen-

erate a coal.

•

The dryness of the materials has, in my experi-

ence, proven to be paramount . . . dry, dry, 

dry!

•

Just because one mullein stalk works easily 

one time does not mean that all mullein stalks 

will be easy. Experiment with different woods, 

or even with different sticks of the same wood, 

to ﬁ nd what works.

FIRE SAW

While hiking in the Fijian jungle with four native 
guides, we stopped for lunch. One fellow jumped 
in the creek and pulled out a number of prawns. 
Two others headed off into the bush and soon 
returned with some kind of fruit and a couple of 

FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

10 9

lengths of bamboo. Th e fourth man built a fi re 
next to a cliff , expertly lighting it with a Bic. Th e 
bamboo sections were loaded up with the prawns 
in one and the roots in the other, water was added, 
and leaves were stuff ed into the openings as stop-
pers. Th e cooking “pots” were then leaned against 
the cliff over the fi re and the contents were soon 
steamed to perfection.
 Aft er eating, the recollection of a reference on 
the fi re saw seeped into my mind and I walked off 
into the jungle in search of bamboo. In short 
order, I had a thirty-inch piece of dead bamboo. 
Bringing it back to our lunch area, I split it down 
the middle and, with the edge of my knife, scraped 
a small pile of shavings from the split edge. I 
placed them in the underside (formerly the inside) 
of one piece. Putting it fl at on the ground, rounded 
edge up, I placed my left foot on one end and 
made a small hole in the top surface near the mid-
dle and directly over the bundle of shavings. With 
the other half held like a saw, I began sawing back 
and forth over the hole. I added pressure with my 
weak hand on the forward end of the saw piece 
and, within a few strokes, had smoke fairly bil-
lowing out from the point of contact. Within 
about twenty-fi ve strokes I stopped, turned over 

Fire saw components

 
110 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

the fi reboard piece, and blew down its length. A 
fl ame was quick in erupting from the smoking 
tinder bundle.
 Th e natives were fl oored. Th ey inspected the 
setup, had me demonstrate again, and tried it a 
few times themselves. Back in the village, word 
quickly spread, and soon many of the inhabitants 
had turned out to see me perform my fi re magic.
 Well, that was when I began calling primitive 
fi re-making skills ego busters. With the whole vil-
lage watching, all I could do was get smoke. Since 
that day, I have worked on the fi re saw and learned 
a few things about technique and manufacture of 
the tool.

By sliding a piece of bamboo (the saw) at speed 
over a small hole in a second piece (called the fi re-
board) while applying downward pressure, fric-
tion is generated, resulting in heat and the 
wearing off of material in dust from both pieces. 
Th is superheated dust falls through the hole onto 
the tinder, where it gloms together. If enough dust 
is generated, it will form a coal that can be blown 
into fl ame with the aid of tinder.
 Th ere are two methods to make a fi re saw. 
We’ll start with the simplest way I have found to 
coax a coal from bamboo.

Moving Saw Method

1. Start with a piece of standing dead bam-
boo (bamboo that was harvested aft er it 
had died, not harvested green and then 
dried), about two feet in length.

2. Split it in half lengthwise.
3. With the edge of your cutting tool, make a 
palm full of tinder shavings by scraping a 
sharp edge along the split portion of the 
bamboo.

4. Wedge the tinder in the middle of one 
piece of bamboo (the fi reboard) on the 

inside and place it on the ground, with the 
tinder and split portions facing down.
5. Directly above the tinder, bore a hole into 
the bamboo. It does not need to go all the 
way through, because it is just there to give 
the saw a guide; however, to save energy 
later, it is advisable to make the hole all the 
way through to the tinder or to even cut a 
groove that is perpendicular to the length 
of the fi reboard.

6. Grip the second half of the split bamboo 
(the saw) in your strong hand like you 
would a sword (right for righties, left for 
left ies), and place your weak hand on the 
forward end.

7. Place one split edge in or on the hole or 
groove that is perpendicular to the fi re-
board, and saw back and forth while 
applying downward pressure. Strokes 

Fire saw position 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should measure about eight to twelve 
inches. Don’t worry about the cant of the 
saw piece in relation to the groove, as fric-
tion will quickly wear both to a perfect fi t. 
I have seen people chase their tails carving 
their set and trying to get everything to fi t 
just so, and aft er three strokes, none of it 
matters anyway. For your fi rst time, I rec-
ommend sawing until you can’t saw any-
more while you are still producing plenty 
of smoke.

8. Put down the saw, roll the fi reboard over, 
and when you see a wisp of smoke, gently 
blow down the length of the bamboo. 
Smoke should increase until a f lame 
rises up.

9. Now simply put the tip of the fi reboard in 
your prebuilt fi re and push the fl aming 
tinder bundle in with the saw.

In good conditions, this whole procedure 
should take less than four minutes, start to 
fi nish.

Tips for the Moving Saw Method

•

Place the fireboard on a raised surface or 

mound to reduce the risk of bashing your 

knuckles.

•

Drive stakes into the ground, two on each side 

of the ﬁ reboard, to help hold it in place.

•

Use full, smooth strokes; i.e., use the maximum 

amount of the saw’s edge as possible instead 

of using short, jerky strokes.

•

If the ground is moist, protect the tinder with a 

dry leaf or stone.

FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

111

Moving Fireboard Method

1. Follow steps 1 through 5 of the moving 

saw method, above.

2. Kneel, and brace the saw on a slant from 
your torso to the ground. It is advisable to 
place some sort of padding between your 
body and the bamboo, as the one is quite 
sharp (read Punji stake) and the other 
quite soft .

3. Grip the fi reboard in both hands so that 
you can place both thumbs on the tinder, 
and place the groove or hole against the 
edge of the saw piece so that it can be slid 
up and down the saw.

Fire saw position 2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

4. Move the fireboard vigorously up and 
down the saw, adding pressure and speed 
until plenty of smoke is generated. Con-
tinue until you tire or can no longer pro-
duce smoke.

5. Proceed to step 8 of the moving saw 

method, above.

FIRE PLOW

If you’ve ever rubbed your hands together vigor-
ously, then you have felt the result of the friction 
generated between the two. Th e fi re plow merely 

substitutes your hands for a more combustible 
material, although the energy expenditure is 
somewhat more signifi cant in order to get a coal.
 Traditionally a fi reboard or hearth that is four 
to fi ve feet long (shorter hearths work, too) is 
placed on the ground, and a ten-inch plow (a stick 
with a chisel-like tip) is rubbed vigorously back 
and forth in a six-inch shallow groove on said 
hearth. Material is worn off both the plow and the 
hearth as speed and pressure increase. Th is dust 
is deposited at one end of the groove, where a con-
tinuous fl ow of new, hot dust is added. Th e heat 
soon gets to the point where it ignites, not to a 
fl ame, but to a coal that is then added to a tinder 
bundle.

Direction of 
movement

Plow

Fireboard

Powder builds up here

Fire plow components

 
 
 
FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

113

 To build a fi re plow, harvest a straight piece of 
dry (or green and let it season), soft wood like 
Atlantic white cedar, poplar, sotol, or some wood 
that has been dead for some time and is getting 
punky, but not so soft that it just tears apart. It 
has been my experience that trunk wood from 
the unsheltered side of trees works best, although 
getting such a piece is a bit tricky. Second best is 
an unsheltered branch. Th e reason for this pref-
erence (only if you are not in sotol country) is 
that unsheltered wood grows faster and is soft er 
than sheltered wood, and it has tighter growth 
rings.
 Th e plow is a ten-inch piece of wood (I prefer 
the same species) that has a beveled, flat, or 
wedge-shaped tip about one-fourth-inch wide. A 
fi ve- to nine-inch line is scraped longitudinally in 

the hearth with a blade, a rock, a stick, or the plow 
itself. Th e set is ready to use. Th e following direc-
tions apply for right-handed users; left ies should 
reverse the directions:

1. Sit astride the hearth and grip the plow 
with your left hand so that the chisel end 
(the tip) protrudes a couple of inches below 
your pinky.

2. Place your right hand in the same fashion 

above your left hand.

3. Slide the plow back and forth in the groove 
so that the whole tip is in contact with the 
groove. Initially, the groove and plow tip 
will not match up well, but aft er a few 
strokes, this will improve beyond what 
anyone could easily carve.

Fire plow posture

 
 
 
 
114 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

4. As you increase pressure and speed, you 
will notice dust building up at the far end 
of the groove. Not going too far with your 
strokes requires practice; the goal is to stop 
just at the pile’s edge. If you go too far, you 
will break up the potential coal. If you 
don’t go far enough, the hot dust generated 
will not add anything to the dust pile.

Fire Plow Tips

•

As you plow, you wear away wood from the 

groove, and if you always stop the plow at the 

same point, you will quickly form a wall. If you 

miscalculate one stroke and hit the wall with 

the plow, you can lose your coal as the hearth 

is jarred or the plow jumps the wall and scat-

ters the dust.

•

Fatigue is also an issue, although the well-

practiced practitioner can get a coal in less 

than twenty seconds. It still requires a real 

e n e rgy co m m itm e nt a n d b u r s t of 

determination.

•

Just as with the bow and drill, analyze your 

work. Look at the dust you are generating. Is it 

small and dark? Good, keep going. Is it light in 

color and small? Add speed. Is it light and 

large? Reduce pressure and increase your 

speed.

•

Fire hardening is an issue here, as it is with other 

techniques. The glossy surface of the groove 

can be scraped away with a knife or stone or 

burned through. (I suggest scraping, as it 

requires less energy than burning through. If 

you choose to burn through it, put a few grains 

of sand in the groove to help sand it out.)

5. Continue rubbing the plow back and 
forth, and as smoke builds, shift the plow 
so that the leading edge is all that is in 
contact with the groove. Th is increases the 
heat generated by the tip, as pressure is not 
spread out over the whole base of the tip.
6. When you see smoke rising from the dust 
pile, transfer the coal to a leaf or piece of 
bark. If the coal is small or the dust pile is 
looking unsteady, gently blow on it to help 
spread the coal prior to moving it to your 
tinder bundle.

LONG MATCH

Carrying fi re from one camp to another is some-
what of an art form. I don’t fi nd it to be of particu-
lar value in a survival situation, because the eff ort 
involved in learning how to master the making 
and tending of a long match (coal carrier) is tan-
tamount to what it takes to learn a fi re-making 
technique. However, while you need to acquire 
specifi c skills for making fi re, you can blunder 
through the long match with only a general idea 
of how it’s done, although you will have varying 
and unpredictable results. I can imagine that 
there may be a situation in which a primitive fi re-
making technique is not known, matches or other 
modern fi re-making devices are in short supply, 
and the long match could be of value.

In the long match, a less fl ammable or non-
fl ammable outer shell holds a tinder bundle and a 
coal within it and limits the amount of air avail-
able to the coal. If the coal receives just enough 
oxygen to keep burning, it will slowly spread 
through the tinder, until, when needed, it is 
opened up and blown into fl ame to light another 

 
 
 
 
 
FIRE- M AK ING TO OL S 

115

fi re. My preferred long match looks like a giant, 
poorly made, hand-rolled cigarette and consists 
of a long core of refi ned tinder surrounded by a 
layer of rougher tinder, like lightly buff ed bark or 
dried grasses (running lengthwise). Th is is then 
rolled or bound in raw or unrefi ned tinder, like 
bark tied with cattail.

First, collect tinder that is similar to the 
papery inner bark of dead trees, such as those in 
the poplar family, and/or dry grasses, cedar bark, 
basswood bark, cattail down, dead century plant, 
or yucca stalks. Do not refine or buff (rub it 
briskly between your hands so as to fray it) all of 
it; leave some in larger pieces so that it will take 
more time to burn. Th e outside can be made of 
sturdier material like bark or a container of wood, 
shell, clay, or the like.
 Use green bark strips, cattail leaves, or other 
pliable material to tightly lash the bundle of fi ne 
tinder, which is surrounded by rougher tinder. 
Th e goal is to control the air that gets to the coal; 
too much air and the tinder burns up too fast, but 
with too little air, the coal goes out. When you get 
it just right, the coal will last for many hours. It 
can be a bit of a fi ne art, building and maintain-
ing the long match. It requires that you pay atten-
tion to detail like the tightness of the tinder, the 
fl ow of air into the bundle, the materials that you 
use, and the moisture content of the materials. 
Practice is the best way to gain profi ciency with 
this skill.
 As you get ready to set off , drop a coal in the 
top of the bundle. Once the coal has caught the 
new material, a piece of bark, a fl attened bit of 
clay, or some other object can be used as a damper, 
i.e., a tool for reducing the amount of oxygen 
available to the coal via the open ends. Th e pro-
cess is not always quite as straightforward as that, 
though. If the bundle is too loose, you will likely 

Long match

end up carrying a full-fl edged fi re in short order. 
Conversely, if the bundle is too tight, you are in 
danger of smothering it, although with the right 
tinder, it is harder to do than you might think. 
Th e bundle may require some movement to feed 
air to the coal; oft en, just carrying it in your hand 
and waving it gently around is enough.
 Occasionally, you may have to tamp it down 
with a blunt stick or move unburned material 
over the top of the coal. Th is serves two purposes: 
it provides fuel and adds insulation; thus, it has 
the same effect as closing the damper on a 
woodstove.

Shells, clay, and wood products can act as the 
outer carrier or case. A case that is easily opened 
and closed can have material added as other mate-
rial burns down, avoiding the need to stop to light 
a new fi re and have to start the process all over 
before continuing.
 A word of caution: Many areas have strict fi re 
regulations. Please be considerate of them, and if 
you want to test out just how long your long match 
will burn, do it in a safe place and don’t leave it 
unattended.

 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 9

FOOD AND DR INK

A balanced diet is composed of foods that sup-

ply enough nutrients to the body for the produc-
tion of energy and heat, as well as for the growth, 
healing, and maintenance of cells. According to 
the United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), a balanced diet should include the 
following:

• 

• 

• 

• 

2–4 servings per day of fruits for vitamins A 
and C
3–5 servings per day of vegetables for fi ber, 
vitamins A and C, and minerals
2–3 servings per day of meat, poultry, and fi sh 
protein for B vitamins, iron, and zinc
2–3 servings per day of dairy products for 
protein, minerals, and vitamins

 Many foods that we take for granted in our 
everyday lives, however, do not grow locally in the 
wild and, if they do, may not be in season. Fruits, 
vegetables, and meat are available, yet milk prod-
ucts are not an option; therefore, these proteins, 
minerals, and vitamins must be acquired from 
other sources. Liver is a good source of iron, zinc, 
and vitamin A. Vitamin D, according to the 
National Institutes of Health, can be acquired by 

exposing your skin to ultraviolet rays, because 
they trigger vitamin D synthesis in the skin.
 Carbohydrates are also important in your 
diet. Sustained activity or a low intake of carbo-
hydrates can cut endurance by half in as little as 
one day.
 Water is also vital, and even in cold, wet 
weather, when you may not feel thirsty, you are 
losing water and need to replenish it on a regular 
basis. According to the National Ski Patrol, a 
 sedentary person loses 2,300 milliliters (more 
than half a gallon) of water daily as follows: 1,400 
ml (about a third of a gallon) in urine, 800 ml (a 
little more than three cups) through respiration 
and evaporation from the skin, and 100 ml (less 
than half a cup) through defecation. In hot 
weather, water loss jumps to 3,300 ml (three-
quarters of a gallon), and with sustained physical 
eff ort, it can be up to 6,600 ml (one and one-half 
gallons) per day.
 Th e best keys to your hydration are the color 
and smell of your urine. It should be clear and 
odorless. If it is dark and pungent, you need to 
increase your water intake, not through guzzling 
one-half gallon at a time but through regularly 
taking smaller drinks.

117

118 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

EATING IN THE WILD

In society, we are used to sitting down to a “full” 
meal, whereas in the wild, snacking on available 
tidbits is par for the course. In summer, when 
food is abundant, snacking on berries, roots, and 
leaves reduces the craving for a meal that will 
leave you feeling stuff ed. Oft en, the “meal” will be 
some seasoned meat in between snacks.

It is important, in times of abundance, to col-
lect and preserve as much food as possible for 
three reasons. First, in the event you are injured, 
ill, or unsuccessful in hunting, having a supply 
of food can save your life. Second, the winter 
may be harsh and long, making the harvesting of 
any root crop impossible. Plants don’t have much 
to off er during this time. Th ird, sometimes a 
thaw in the winter will rot meat, or a leak will 
destroy some of your preserved dry foods. Hav-
ing extra supplies can see you through challeng-
ing times.
 Th e following are a few tips for a wilderness 
diet, drawn from personal experience in which 
health was (apparently) maintained. However, 
because I am not a dietitian, I recommend that 
you seek professional guidance in developing 
your own wild diet.

• 

• 

Eating some form of carbohydrate daily, 
whether it be burdock root, wild carrot, leek, 
Jerusalem artichoke, hog peanut, grass seed, 
cattail, and, of course, acorn fl our, helps keep 
up your energy.
Fiber from greens is also worth the eff ort of 
harvest. Lamb’s-quarters and ladies’ thumb 
are great additions to any stew or salad; they’ll 
help keep your bowels moving, too. Burdock 
can be found in disturbed soil, fi eld edges, and 
stream banks and beds. As a biennial, the 

energy of the fi rst year goes into the root, 
which can be eaten raw, boiled, or fried. 
Young leaves can be cooked in changes of 
water. For a discussion of milkweed, another 
good choice, refer to “Vegetables” under “Meal 
Preparation and Cooking” later in this 
chapter.
In the fall, any nuts—acorns, hickories, wal-
nuts, butternuts, walnuts, and beechnuts—are 
great sources of proteins and oils. (Acorns 
need to be processed prior to use. See the side-
bar “Acorns” for directions.) 
During the spring and summer, strawberries, 
raspberries, blackberries, gooseberries, blue-
berries, elderberries, serviceberries, grapes, 
and a host of other fruits are available to pro-
vide plenty of vitamins and minerals.
Consuming meat three times a week is a great 
source of protein. Meat also provides more 
energy than plant matter, especially in the 
colder months when pemmican becomes 
more of a staple. Access to fi sh is good, but 
also make a point of eating red meat at least 
twice a week to augment a fi sh diet.
Meat can also be easily preserved, as discussed 
under “Preserving Food” in this chapter. 
Geese, ducks, turkeys, grouse, pheasants, and 
doves are all fi ne additions to any diet. Veni-
son, woodchucks, squirrels, and rabbits are 
good, tasty sources of red meat, and snapping 
turtles, fi sh, snakes, and their eggs add variety 
to the menu if you’re not too squeamish.
Tea should be a regular thirst quencher. Pine 
needle and hemlock (from the tree, not from 
poison hemlock or water hemlock) teas are 
great sources of vitamin C, an absolute must 
to prevent scurvy. Mints, young birch leaves, 
and the inner bark of black birch, pine, and 
sassafras are all quite tasty.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 
 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

119

Acorns

Of the many sources of food in the wild, acorns 

form of acorn weevils, you should never have any 

are a real boon to those willing to process them. 

problem acquiring plenty of acorns. When found 

Oaks can be divided into two basic varieties: red 

on the ground with the cap still attached, acorns 

(or black) oaks and white oaks. They differ in a 

are almost certain to contain weevils, as are 

number of ways important to acorn harvest.

acorns with a brown spot or a hole in them.

Preparation of acorns is needed not only to 

• 

Red Oaks,

 like the scarlet oaks, begin to bear 

remove the tannins, but also to ensure that you 

fruit at about twenty years old but don’t reach 

don’t lose your harvest to mold. Acorns should 

their full potential until about ﬁ fty years old. 

ﬁ rst be shelled (they are easily cracked when 

Acorns take two years to mature and contain 

thumped with a stick), and then the tannins can 

high amounts of tannins, giving the acorns a 

be leached out in one of two ways:

bitter taste. They generally produce a good 

crop every three to ﬁ ve years. One tree may 

• 

Cold leaching:

 The shelled acorns are left in a 

produce a good crop while the tree next to it 

bag or basket in ﬂ owing water until they can 

may be having a poor year.

be eaten raw with little or no bitterness. This 

• 

White Oaks

 can produce acorns every year, 

can take a few days; much depends on the 

some with so little tannins that they can be 

ﬂ ow of the water and the porosity of the bag. 

eaten raw. According to the USDA Forest Ser-

Shelled acorns are also subject to theft by crit-

vice, even though white oaks can produce 

ters, so beware.

high numbers of acorns, good years are spo-

• 

Hot leaching:

 Acorns, crushed or whole, are 

radic, occurring once every four to ten years. 

boiled in changes of water until the water 

Sometimes a few years will pass with no crop 

remains clear or only lightly colored. Accord-

at all. Even in good years not every tree will 

ing to Karen Sherwood of Earthwalk North-

produce a heavy crop of acorns, so when a 

west, the acorns must be immersed in already

healthy crop is available, it should be taken 

boiling water and each successive change 

advantage of. It should be noted that white 

should be boiling prior to adding the acorns, 

oak acorns germinate quickly upon falling to 

or the tannins will be removed yet the bitter-

the ground, thus diminishing their nutritional 

ness will stay. The tea-brown water should not 

value.

be thrown out. It is an antiviral and antiseptic, 

making it a good wash for dermatitis and, 

Acorns should be harvested in the fall when they 

according to Dan Fisher, an effective laundry 

are dropping naturally. Competition for acorns 

detergent, though it will lightly stain white 

can be stiff, but on a good year you should have 

clothes. 

no problem collecting more than you can deal 

with. If you are not against extra protein in the 

continued

 
12 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

continued

Once the tannins have been leached out the 

acorns need to be roasted and pulverized to a 

ﬁ ne powder. Store in a cool, dry area.

Acorn ﬂ our lacks wheat’s cohesiveness and 

produces a crumbly product unless cut 50/50–

75/25 with another ﬂ our. Other additives are cat-

tail pollen, bulrush, or other ground seeds, ground 

beechnut, walnut, and hickory nuts (nuts that 

need no treatment other than shelling). For por-

ridge, a mixture of the any of the above, in any 

ratio, can be made by adding hot water and stir-

ring well.

FLAVORED DRINKS

While a natural diet may increase your apprecia-
tion for fresh, untreated water, there are times 
when a little fl avor can enhance a drink and pro-
vide a well-received treat for the taste buds. When 
your diet does not involve fl ooding your pallet 
with powerful fl avors, chances are you will begin 
to notice more subtle tastes that you would other-
wise miss. I oft en eat violets as a test to see how 
sensitive my pallet is. If the violet is sweet, then I 
am not overseasoning my food; on the other 
hand, if the taste of that little purple fl ower is 
bland, it’s time to lay off the spices a bit. Th us it is 
that a little additive goes a long way in changing 
the fl avor of a drink. Any food with fl avor can be 
added to water, hot or cold, to make tea.

Harvesting Plants for Tea

Th e best time to use a plant for tea is fresh upon 
harvesting it. If you wish to preserve the plant for 
use at a later date, then it needs to be dried as soon 
as possible after harvesting. Many harvested 
plants never get used due to mold, because they 
are set aside upon the return to camp—all the 
verve of the herb seeker gone after walking, 
searching, and collecting. Treat the herbs as you 
would a dead animal. I would no more leave a 
bunch of mint plants out in the sun than I would 
a deer carcass aft er a hunt.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

For leafy herbs on the stalk like mint, collect 
them, tie them in bundles, and hang the bun-
dles upside down in a cool, dry place. Do not 
dry the plants too quickly. Th e upper area of 
any shelter is usually suffi cient, or, in dry cli-
mates, herbs can be hung from a line between 
two trees in the shade.
For loose leaves like spring birch leaves, place 
them on a cloth, rock, or other dry surface. I 
have done this in direct sunlight and in shade 
with no apparent diff erence between the two.
For roots, like that of the sassafras, simply 
keep them in a cool, dry place, or, to speed up 
the drying process, split the root lengthwise.
Bark, such as that of the black or golden birch, 
can be stripped from the sapling or branch 
and left in a cool, dry place and then kept in a 
breathable bag in the top of your shelter.
Fruit, like prickly pear (called “tuna”), can be 
sliced and dried on hot rocks in the sun aft er 
singeing off the spines. Th e dried disks can be 
left as is or pounded into smaller pieces and 
stored in a bag until ready for use.

 
Making Tea

Hot tea is made by adding boiling water to herbs 
that are already in a container; cover them and let 
them steep (stand) for about twenty minutes. Th e 
quantity of herbs used is up for debate. Some rec-
ommend using a 1:15 or 1:20 herb-to-water ratio. 
If a large quantity of tea is to be consumed, I have 
made stronger batches and simply added more 
water as needed. Th e fi rst batch is made fast and 
strong, and it’s all downhill from there. A cau-
tionary note: Many herbs have medicinal quali-
ties and compounds that can be harmful if too 
much is taken at any one time. See the Appendix 
for recommended books on edible and medicinal 
plants.

For cold tea, add the herbs to the water and let 

the solution stand overnight.

• 

• 

• 

Sassafras
 has been used for many years as a 
seasoning. In teas, it has long been credited 
with staving off illness. Th e bark, roots, and 
leaves are full of fl avor and can add to that of 
any other tea. Th e root must be boiled in water 
to really pull out the fl avor. Th e young leaves 
can be dried, ground into powder, and added 
to soups.
pine needle tea, harvest the nee-
To prepare 
dles and dice them. A one-inch-diameter 
bundle makes about two cups. Put the needles 
into hot water, and simmer them until the 
water takes on a golden color.
Harvest leaves from 
birch trees when they fi rst 
come out in the spring. Dry them by placing 
them briefl y in the sun or by hanging a whole 
branch upside down in a cool, dry place. To 
make tea, boil water and add the leaves. Let 

F O O D A N D D R I N K 

121

• 

• 

them steep for about five minutes before 
drinking.
—either individual leaves or the whole 
Mint
plant—can be harvested and prepared in the 
same way.
To prepare a tasty 
bark tea, use the inner bark 
from pine and black birch trees. Strip the bark 
from a live sapling or branch, and add either 
fresh or dried bark to boiling water. Let it 
steep for fi ve minutes and then drink it. Both 
inner barks, when dry, can be pounded into 
fl our in an emergency.

MEAL PREPAR ATION AND COOKING

When I was a boy and learning about wild edi-
bles, I would fry everything I got my hands on. 
Traipsing about the woods with my .22, I’d shoot 
grouse and fry it; dig up roots and fry them; grab 
a squirrel and yes, fry that, too. Eventually, my 
mother caught me at it—something about feath-
ers under the stove—and introduced me to some 
of the fi ner points of meal preparation. I took it to 
heart and took these ideas to the woods. Below 
are a number of ways in which food can be pre-
pared. Bon appétit.

Vegetables

It is one thing to know that a plant is edible and 
another to know how best to prepare it. Th e edible 
plants in North America number in the thou-
sands, and with many good books on the subject I 
have chosen ten widely available plants for their 
ease of use, accessibility, and nutritional value.

 
 
12 2 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Hog peanut

H O G P E A N U T. Th e twining vines of the hog pea-
nut, an annual, can be found in moist woods and 
rich soil. Its alternate leafs are divided into three 
light green, ovate leafl ets, among which the white- 
or lilac-colored fl owers can be found between July 
and September. Beneath the detritus of the forest 
fl oor, threadlike creepers produce petalless blos-
soms that are similar in shape to a shelled peanut 
or bean.
 Use: Harvest the hog peanut in late fall 
through early spring. Th e “peanuts” can be soaked 
for a few hours or overnight in water, the shell 
removed, and the meat boiled for about ten min-
utes as an additive to any soup or porridge. If the 
peanuts are not soaked, the shell is harder to 
remove and the peanuts require more time to 
cook.

J E R U S A L E M A R T I C H O K E . Th is rough, hairy peren-
nial spreads through its roots rather than pro-
ducing seeds. Th e mature stalk commonly stands 
in excess of six feet and can reach as much as ten 
feet. Several yellow flower heads adorn each 
plant. Leaves on the upper portion of the stalk 
are alternated, while those below are usually 
opposite. Large, potatolike tubers are found in 

Jerusalem artichoke

among the roots. The Jerusalem artichoke is 
found in waste grounds or disturbed soil, in 
damp fi eld edges, and along streams where sun-
light is available.
 Use: This perennial can be cooked like a 
potato or be eaten raw, dried and ground as a 
fl our additive, or be used as a hot cereal or stew 
thickener.

S T I N G I N G N E T T L E . Th is leafy herb stands, when 
erect, at two to six feet in height. Its square stem is 
nonbranching and covered with little stinging 
hairs. Th e ovate leaves are toothed and clearly 
veined; the underside is also covered with sting-
ing hairs. It is commonly found in moist, rich soil, 
in fi eld edges, and on stream banks.
 Use: Young shoots can be boiled or steamed 
for three or four minutes and eaten like spinach. 

 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

12 3

Stinging nettle

Cattail

Leaves or whole, young plants can be used to 
make tea (drink the water in which you cook net-
tles). Th e roots can be gathered from fall through 
spring and are tasty cooked like potatoes. Note: 
Each tiny hair on this plant has a bit of formic 
acid at its base. When it is introduced to your 
body through contact with the hair, it causes an 
itchy, stinging rash that some fi nd unpleasant. If 
nothing else, it stimulates blood fl ow. 

C AT TA I L . Th e swordlike leaves of the cattail are 
rather stiff and erect. At the top of a nonbranch-
ing, stiff stem, clusters of tiny fl owers form the 
familiar cylindrical female head above which the 
male or pollen head rises. Th e pollen head is gold 
in color when it is full of pollen but quickly turns 
brown and rather ragged, leaving only the spike-
like top of the stem.

 Use: Th e cattail plant is one worth becoming 
acquainted with, as it can provide some sort of 
food year-round. In the spring, the young shoots 
are easily broken off of the roots (some roots can 
be pulled to the surface with a stout stick, while 
others may require you to wade in). Th ey are then 
peeled and can be eaten raw, steamed, or added to 
a soup. Young stalks less than thirty inches in 
length can be steamed and eaten. In the late 
spring, the young fl ower heads can be boiled or 
steamed and eaten. Th e fl ower heads can be tricky 
to spot when they are still young enough to eat, 
because they are still in the sheath created by the 
leaves; therefore, you must carefully look and feel 
through the cattails. If you miss the fl ower heads, 
wait until early summer for the pollen spikes that 
will rise golden above the fl ower head. Th e pollen 
can be gathered by placing a bag over the head, 

 
124 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

bending it over, and shaking it vigorously. On a 
windless day, an open container with high sides 
can also do the job. Much can be gathered in a 
short time in this way. Dry the pollen thoroughly 
before you store it or you will lose it to mold or 
rot. Pollen can be used as a fl our additive or stew 
thickener. In the late summer, as the roots prepare 
to spread, the tips produce pointy sprouts that can 
be peeled and eaten raw or boiled. From fall 
through early spring, the roots can be pulled up, 
washed, and skinned. Th e remaining root can be 
squeezed, kneaded, and generally manhandled in 
a container of cold water. You will see clouds of 
white spread out into the water as the starch is 
released, and in short order the water will become 
slick and viscous as the starch concentration 
increases. Once the water becomes syrupy, I sug-
gest that you start a new container, because the 
ability of the water to remove starch seems to 
decrease as it becomes supersaturated. Remove 
the fi bers left from the roots as you proceed. I 
simply run my fingers through the solution, 
although if you happen to have a wire mesh 
strainer in your pocket, by all means use it! Th e 
starch will slowly settle to the bottom of the con-
tainer, making it possible to pour off the water 
and leaving the starch on the bottom. Dry the 
starch on a fl at rock near the fi re by spreading it 
out. Once it is dry, it can be stored indefi nitely as 
long as it is kept dry. Th e cattail starch can be used 
as fl our or yet another stew thickener.

P R I C K LY P E A R . Th e prickly pear is made up of 
jointed pads with large, easy-to-spot spines sur-
rounded by fi ner tuft s of hairlike fi bers. Th e yel-
low fl owers in bloom during spring to midsummer 
can be found along the edges of the upper pads. 
The fruits, available from midsummer to late 
summer and into the fall, are purple to red and 

also have the large spines as well as many smaller 
hairs. Th is hardy cactus can be found in much of 
the United States both as an ornamental as well as 
in the wild. It is much more prolifi c in the desert 
Southwest.
 Use: Th e fruit is delicious raw or cooked. Th e 
small hairs should be wiped off with a cloth or, 
better yet, singed off in a fl ame. Skinning, wiping, 
brushing with vegetation, and scorching are the 
methods I’ve used to deal with the small hairs. 
Scorching is by far the best method, but it’s not 
always possible due to fi re danger, etc. While the 
small hairs are not terrible, they will stick in 
hands and mouth alike and, when pushed, will 
cause minor pain until your body breaks them 
down. In the hands, this can take a few days; in 
the mouth, expect them to dissolve in about 
twenty-four hours. Th e fruit can then be cut in 
half and the inside turned out and eaten, much as 

Prickly pear

 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

12 5

you would eat half of a grapefruit. Th e seeds can 
be eaten, but they may cause intestinal discom-
fort. If you plan on eating many fruits, remove the 
seeds and eat only the pulp. Pulp can be spread 
out and dried for later use. Th e seeds can be dried 
and ground; the fl our will not cause the discom-
fort that the raw seeds do. Th e pads require the 
same treatment, followed by skinning and roast-
ing them whole or cutting them into strips and 
steaming them. While hunger is the best season-
ing (next to butter and garlic), I do not fi nd myself 
craving the pads as I do the fruits.

P I N E . Easily identifi ed, this evergreen has long 
needles, either single or in bundles of two to fi ve. 
Th e needle bundles, in cross section, make a cir-
cle, and the individual needles make up their 
respective fractions of that circle (with fi ve needle 
pines, each needle is a fi ft h of the circle). Pine-
cones vary from one type of pine to another. Th e 
white pine oft en reaches heights of 150 feet and 
has long, slim cones with open scales. Th e piñon 
pine is a low, shrubby pine with egg-shaped cones 
and closed scales.
 Use: Th ere are many listed uses for pine, some 
well founded and others a little more far-fetched 
or requiring a near-starving condition to merit 
any attempt at ingestion. Th e needles of pines are 
high in vitamin C, a necessary component of any 
diet. For tea, dice a handful of young needles 
found at the branch tips, and simmer them for 
anywhere from fi ve to twenty minutes; then let 
the solution steep for fi ft een minutes or more 
(overnight if you wish). While this tea is good, too 
much is not good for you. Have a cup or two every 
day or two if you have no other sources of vitamin 
C. Th e inner bark is oft en said to make a pasta 
substitute. I am not sure where these people get 
their pasta or how they cook it, but pine inner 

Pine

bark is nothing like pasta. While the inner bark 
does contain starches and sugars, among other 
nutrients, it does not taste good, and even when it 
is boiled, it is tough in the mouth as well as in the 
gut. If you simply must eat it, I recommend chew-
ing it, swallowing the juices, and spitting out the 
rest. Th e pinecones contain seeds between the 
scales. Th ey are edible, are high in protein and 
oils, and have varying tastes. All are edible, 
although some can be tough to remove from 
between the scales. In such cases, dry the cone by 
a fi re or in the sun and the scales will open, allow-
ing easier access to the nuts. It should be noted 
that the nuts of some pines are quite small and 
their collection can be rather tedious.

S T R AW B E R R Y. Th is plant is small and low to the 
ground, standing up to six inches in height. Leaf 
stalks are long and have three large-toothed leaf-
lets at the top. Th e fl owers (one-half to one inch 
across) are white, fi ve petaled, and symmetrical; 
they appear on a separate stalk in midspring with 
the fruit appearing about three or four weeks 

 
126 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Burdock

Strawberry

later. Strawberries can be found in open mead-
ows, along forest edges, and in other areas that 
are exposed to the sun.
 Use: Th e berries can be eaten raw or mushed 
on a fl at rock, then be left to dry either in the sun 
or by the fi re and stored dry for future use. Th e 
leaves can be harvested and used for tea that is 
rich in vitamin C.
 Note: Strawberries are easy to overlook, as they 
can grow in grasses, but once you see a plant, fi nd-
ing others is easy. Th at being said, gathering straw-
berries can be easy and slow but very rewarding.

B U R D O C K . This plant is a large, heart-shaped, 
rough-leafed biennial; its leaves can be longer 
than two feet and wider than one foot, in its sec-
ond year of growth. Th e undersides of the basal 
leaves are covered with wooly fuzz, and the 
branching stalk can exceed six feet in height. 
Many thistlelike, green burrs or (fl owers) with 
lavender centers can be found at the branch ends. 

Th e fi rst-year plant forms a rosette of large (up to 
one foot), heart-shaped leaves with no stalk. Th e 
lower stems are oft en somewhat purplish and fade 
to green as they get closer to the leaf. Burdock is 
found in waste ground, along riverbeds, in fi elds, 
and in meadows.
 Use: Th e fi rst-year taproot is long and gener-
ally slender, light brown, and tasty raw, boiled, or 
steamed. Th e use of a digging stick eases the har-
vest of these roots. Note: the roots of second-year 
plants are quite large but very woody and, in my 
experience, not worth harvesting.
 Th e young leaves and stems can be steamed or 
boiled; older leaves tend to be very bitter and 
require boiling in at least two changes of water.

L A M B ’ S - Q U A R T E R S . Th is is an herbaceous, widely 
branching, erect plant that has a slightly grooved 
stem with reddish shading near the base of the 
leaf stem. Th e underside of the diamond-shaped 
leaves has a powdered white appearance, while 
the tops are a soft green. Th e fl owers appear in 
dense clusters on spikes and are small and round. 

 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

127

Lamb’s-quarters

Bullrushes

Th ey become tinged with red as they mature and 
eventually turn more brown in the fall.
 Use: Th e young plants and new leaves on older 
plants can be eaten raw or boiled with older leaves 
for ten to fi ft een minutes. Th e fl owers can be eaten 
raw or boiled, or you can let them mature and 
harvest them in the fall. Winnowing is a good 
idea unless you crave fi ber. Th e ground seeds can 
be used as a fl our additive or, better yet, as por-
ridge. Th e hulls, if left on, will give the porridge a 
consistency that takes either hunger or some get-
ting used to. Th ey are not bad for you, but those 
who have a discerning palate may be challenged.

B U L L R U S H E S . Th is plant has a smooth stem and is 
round or triangular, pithy, and dark to light green 

in color. It stands from two to nine feet in height. 
Leaves are absent, although the sheath tips can 
extend away from the stem as much as eight 
inches. Flowers are found at the end of the stems 
in clusters of brown spikelets that are one-half to 
one inch in length. Roots are horizontal, scaly, 
and stout.
 Use: Lower stalks and young shoots make a 
juicy trailside, thirst-quenching snack. From the 
fall through the spring, the root stock can be har-
vested, crushed, and dried, and the fi bers can be 
removed. Th e remaining dry-root material can be 
ground for fl our or cooked with water as a por-
ridge. Bullrushes have many seeds, and the husk 
must be separated from the actual seeds. If you 
are hungry or picky, you may not want to separate 

 
12 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

out the seeds. I have eaten quantities of seeds in 
porridge, both winnowed (seed hulls removed) 
and unprocessed. Th e latter was defi nitely better, 
but either way works.
 All plants should be positively identified 
before you consume them. Use a fi eld guide, or 
ask an herbalist to be sure that you are collecting 
safe plants.
 Other uses for wild plant items include the 
following:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Wild carrot or Queen Anne’s lace can be eaten 
raw, added to soup or salad, or roasted.
Burdock root can be prepared like wild 
carrot.
Bullrush seeds can be cooked in water as por-
ridge. Add honey and/or berries if any are 
attainable. Begin by rock-boiling water (see 
below); add the seeds and stir.
Wild garlic, leeks, chives, garlic mustard, hog 
peanuts, and Jerusalem artichokes can be 
added to meals as fl avor enhancers, nibbled 
raw as a snack, or cooked.
Milkweed pods can be harvested before they 
open and rock-boiled. Put enough water in 
two containers so that each can easily accom-
modate the rocks, and allow the pods to sub-
merge. Rock-boil one container, and then add 
the pods. As the water turns murky, add hot 
rocks to a second container. Only when this is 
boiling, move the pods to the clean, hot water. 
Th en, dump the contents of the fi rst container 
and refi ll it with clean water. Add rocks and 
boil yet again. Add pods to this third change 
of hot water, and aft er three minutes, remove 
them and eat them. Note: Do not remove the 
pods from hot water and place them in cold 
water, as this can inhibit the leaching out 

of the sap. Hastily cooked pods will lead to 
nausea.

Meats

For fresh meat, the easiest and juiciest way to pre-
pare it is merely to toss a chunk into the fi re. Th e 
outside will burn and seal in the moisture, allow-
ing the meat to steam in its own juices. Aft er it 
has cooked for a bit (the larger the piece, the lon-
ger the cooking time; you need to experiment), 
pull it out with some tongs (see Chapter 16) and 
break it open. It should be pink, not red. If it is 
still red, toss it back for a bit. Th e downside to this 
method is that some meat is lost when the outside 
burns.
 Woodchuck is best eaten freshly roasted 
because its fat and fl esh are marbled. Th is means 
that the fat does not just sit in one layer next to the 
hide; instead, it can be found throughout the 
meat, like in bacon. In woodchuck jerky, greasy 
spots can be clearly seen, and the threat of the fat 
becoming rancid and giving the meat a bad taste 
is a real one. Because the fat melts at a lower tem-
perature than venison fat, this animal is great for 
roasting.
 Geese, ducks, turkey, and grouse are all fan-
tastic roasting birds. Th e fat dribbles down the 
roasting stick into the fire, creating awesome 
smells and a juicy meal to die for. If you don’t like 
liver as a rule, try roasted goose liver; it can’t be 
topped.
 Venison fat melts at a very high temperature 
and therefore does not provide the natural bast-
ing action of other meats like goose or pork. 
Therefore, if you are making kabobs or other 
roasts, cook them to medium rare so that some of 
the juices are retained. Venison makes good, 

 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

12 9

long-lasting jerky (see “Drying Meat” under “Pre-
serving Food,” later in this chapter).

in, and it would take a number of hours for it to 
dry out.

Snapping turtles should not be cooked in their 
own shell. You will only burn the meat. Instead, 
cut the meat out and roast or jerk it. Roasting with 
herbs or jerking suit this meat well. Prepare it as 
you would prepare venison.

Fish

With a sharp rock or knife, cut from the rectum 
along the belly to just below the gills. Remove the 
guts and rinse out the cavity.
 Trout up to about eleven inches can be stuff ed 
with herbs or herb paste and steamed. (Garlic 
mustard leaves, mustard seeds, chives, and leeks 
are a few herbs that can be ground into a paste 
either together or separately.) Lacerations on the 
outside of the fi sh can also be smeared with sea-
soning before you wrap the fi sh in wild grape 
leaves. Place the fi sh in the ashes near the coals. 
White ash, not actual coals, should cover the 
entire fi sh. If you don’t want to turn the fi sh to 
cook both sides, then coals can be raked in a circle 
around the ash-covered fi sh; this will ensure even 
cooking. An eight-inch trout should take about 
four to six minutes to cook (overcooking is better 
than undercooking). Carefully remove the trout. 
Th e grape leaves should be dry on the outside and 
stuck together. Blow off any loose ash and remove 
the leaves. If the back fi n pulls out with ease, the 
fi sh is cooked, steamed in its own juices and those 
of the herbs.
 Wrapping a fi sh in clay also works well, and 
you can use raw, unpurifi ed clay. Learning how 
long to leave the fi sh in the clay, or how long to 
put the clay in the fi re, is the trick, but there is one 
break you get using this method: the fi sh is sealed 

Large trout (greater than eleven inches) are 
better roasted with a stick jammed through the 
mouth and stuck deep into the tail. Start with the 
back (spine) down, as this is the thickest part. 
Th en cook either side and fi nish with a quick heat 
underneath.
 Cooking trout on sticks to perfection requires 
some practice. If you cook the fi sh too long on 
one side, it will spin on the cooking stick and 
may end up in the fi re. If you think that a side is 
done, try to remove a fi n. If it pulls out cleanly 
with the internal bone still attached, that side is 
done.
 Once the trout is roasted, place it on a slab of 
bark, remove the fi ns and head (eat the cheeks), 
and gently separate the two sides of the fi sh by 
cutting the skin along the spine and pulling the 
head of the spine up and away from the lower side. 
Fingers or a stick may be required to help separate 
the fi llet from the ribs and spine. Th is should give 
you one boneless fi llet. Now, simply pull the spine 
away from the remaining side. Garlic mustard 
leaves are then used in lieu of a utensil. Not only 
does this give you the illusion that your hands 
will not get greasy—it also adds a fantastic fl avor 
to the trout.

PIT COOKING

Th e pit cooking method has a number of varia-
tions, yet the one described here is my favorite. It 
is great for cooking large game or big meals. I 
oft en cook a few geese or turkeys, as well as some 
fi sh and corn, in one cooking.

 
 
 
130 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Pit cooking setup

 Hot rocks on the bottom of the pit heat the 
soil and grasses above, creating steam, which then 
surrounds the food and cooks it evenly. Th e rocks 
above also generate heat, ensuring that the tops of 
the bigger food items get cooked as well. Th e soil 
prevents the grasses from burning and dropping 
the food directly on the hot rocks. Th e basket 
makes it easier to remove the middle layer of soil 
without getting your food dirty.

Preparing the Pit

Th e pit should be two feet deep or more and wide 
enough to accommodate everything you plan on 
cooking in a single layer without any items touch-
ing each other. Keep the soil in a pile close by, and 
pull out any rocks that are larger than grapefruit 
size.

1. Collect rocks the size of cantaloupes, 
enough to cover the bottom of the pit two 

and a half times. Keep in mind that you 
will need to move these rocks when they 
are red hot; therefore, only heat rocks that 
you have the means to move.

2. Harvest enough long grasses for two four-

inch layers in the pit.

3. Create a safe place for a large fi re near the 
pit (ten to fi ft een feet away), and gather 
plenty of wood to keep the fi re going for a 
minimum of two hours.

4. Harvest burdock or other large leaves for 

covering the meat.

5. Find a forked stick, or two long, stout 
sticks, to transfer hot rocks to the pit.
6. (Optional) Collect some saplings that are 
one to two inches in diameter, and lash 
them together to make a grid or basket 
that will just fi t inside the pit.

7. Start a tipi fi re, add the rocks to it, and put 
more wood on top of the rocks before you 
move well away. I oft en use rocks directly 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

131

Pit grid

from streams and have never yet had one 
explode, and I hope I never do. But to be 
safe, I move off to where I can still keep an 
eye on the fi re to make sure that it does 
not spread yet be out of harm’s way if a 
rock does explode. (Th e beauty of the tipi 
fi re is the fact that it does not need to be 
tinkered with.) After an hour, you can 
safely approach the fi re again.

Packing and Unpacking the Pit

larger the item, the bigger the margin 
around it needs to be.

4. Cover items with burdock or other large 
leaves and then with about two inches of 
grass.

5. Place the basket (optional) on top of the 
grass, and add an additional few inches of 
grass inside the basket.

6. Add another four-inch layer of soil.
7. Add another layer of rocks.
8. Finally, add another layer of soil.

Aft er about two hours, the rocks should be red 
hot and ready to be moved into the pit.
 Moving hot rocks is dangerous. One method 
is to carry them with a forked stick, and another 
is to drag them on a piece of bark. Either way, pay 
attention and watch out for hot pieces of broken 
rock between the fi re and the pit, and wear shoes.
Put one layer of hot rocks in the pit. It is OK if 

Be careful not to pack or compress any of the 
layers in the pit, because this results in poor trans-
mission of heat and convection of steam.
 A fi ft een-pound bird takes about two and a 
half hours to cook, but it does not hurt to let it 
cook longer. Due to all of the steam, this is one 
bird that won’t dry out. When it’s time to open 
the pit:

coals or ash get in there, too.

1. Cover the rocks with about three or four 

inches of soil.

2. Add a four-inch layer of green grass.
3. Place all items to be cooked on the grasses, 
being careful that none are touching, as 
this can hinder the cooking process. Th e 

1. Carefully remove the soil and hot rocks.
2. If you used a grid or basket, remove it 
along with any remaining soil. If you 
didn’t use a grid or basket, carefully 
remove as much soil as possible by hand.
3. Th e grasses are, with luck, very green due 
to their recent steaming. If not, the food 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

needs to be cooked longer. Remove the hot 
grasses carefully, exposing the burdock-
covered food.

4. Remove the food from the pit with the 
leaves still on, and place it on whatever 
your eating surface may be.

ROCK BOILING

Rock boiling is a technique whereby rocks heated 
in a fi re are used to cook or purify liquids such as 
soup or water. You will need the following items:

• 

• 

• 
• 

Waterproof container, such as one made from 
stone or bark (see Chapter 17)
Eight egg-sized stones (per half gallon of 
liquid)
A pair of tongs (see Chapter 16)
A good fi re

 Th e steps to rock boiling are as follows:

room and the pressure builds to such a 
level that the rock explodes with poten-
tially deadly force. Quartz rocks are 
known for exploding because of the many 
cavities found within them where steam 
pressure can build.

2. Place the rocks in a hardwood fi re, leaving 
a few inches between each rock to allow 
for better heating.

3. Fill the container one-half full of water or 
soup, and wait for the rocks to heat; it will 
take about forty-fi ve minutes for the rocks 
to become glowing hot.

4. Remove the rocks from the fi re with tongs, 
and carefully blow the ash from both. 
Slowly lower the rocks into the liquid, and 
keep adding rocks until a boil is achieved. 
One-half gallon of water requires three to 
fi ve egg-sized rocks and about thirty sec-
onds to achieve a boil. To maintain a boil, 
periodically remove stones and add addi-
tional hot rocks.

1. Collect your rocks. If they have been gath-
ered in a water-rich area, such as a creek 
bed or lakeshore, heat them slowly and/or 
keep out of the fi re area to avoid injury due 
to exploding rocks. Some rocks have small 
cracks, invisible to the human eye, that, 
over time, allow water to enter. When 
these rocks are heated, the water in the 
stone turns to steam and leaves through 
the crack by which it entered or expands 
faster than the crack can accommodate 
and breaks the rock. Oft en, the rock sim-
ply falls apart, because there is not enough 
room within the stone to allow pressure to 
build up. However, sometimes there is 

STORING FOOD

Any number of animals, from ants to grizzly 
bears, may try to take advantage of your food-
gathering eff orts. One way to protect your stores 
is to toss a line over a high branch, tie a food 
satchel to it, and haul it aloft . As long as the satchel 
is high enough without being too close to the 
branch above it, or to the tree trunk, it should be 
out of reach of most critters.
 Another way to keep food safe is by keeping it 
in a storage pit. Dry areas are best for long-term 
storage, but any soil type will work for short-term 
storage.

 
 
 
 
 
 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

133

thick coats. Let it dry between each coat to avoid 
cracking. Cover the last coat with leaves while the 
mixture is still wet, as this aids in camoufl aging 
the cache and adds a little rain protection.
 Dried grasses or leaves should be placed in 
the pit and the food nested within. Adding dried 
aromatic plants to the pit, like sweet fern or 
mint, can help mask any lingering food scents. 
Once food is inside the bin, the top can be laid in 
place and sealed with more clay or mud for an 
extended absence, or it can be covered with more 
leaves if the food will be used every day. Pieces 
of bark with leaves piled on top can be placed 
over the lid as added protection against the 
weather.

Storage pit and lid

 One type of pit can be made by digging a hole 
in the ground about two feet deep, two feet wide, 
and as long as necessary. Four inches from the top 
of the hole, widen the pit all the way around by 
four inches to create a “shelf.” Line the pit up to 
the bottom of the shelf with stone, and pack the 
seams with a raw clay or a mud and grass mix-
ture. Make a small fi re inside to drive out any 
moisture.

For the lid, cut sapling trunks that are the 
width of the hole plus eight inches for the shelf on 
each side. Lash the trunks together until you have 
a lid that can be rested on the shelf over the hole.

For handles, a piece of sapling with two 
branches growing out of it can be lashed to two 
opposing corners of the lid. Paste over the lid with 
the grass and mud mixture in a few one-inch-

PRESERVING FOOD

Hunting and food gathering are necessary com-
ponents of wilderness living but should not con-
sume all of your time. As seasons change, various 
edibles come and go. With this in mind, you 
should gather food beyond your immediate needs 
when opportunities present themselves and pre-
serve it for future use.

Berries

In much of North America, many fruits can be 
found from June through the early frosts of the 
fall. Some of them are raspberries, blackberries, 
huckleberries, elderberries, mulberries, apples, 
pears, prickly pears, blueberries, persimmons, 
and many others. Most can be harvested in a 
straightforward way, sliced or mashed out fl at, 
and dried for later use. Others require a more spe-
cialized harvest and preparation.

 
 
 
13 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Prickly pears, for example, off er up their pads 
the best when they are young in the spring. Th eir 
fruit comes in August and September, with some 
still available in October. Th eir spines and small, 
hairlike stickers deter the overzealous harvester 
and provide sharp reminders to be careful. I reg-
ularly have run-ins with the hairy stickers while 
eagerly trying to shove the delicious fruit down 
my throat. Th e stickers are not terrible. Th ey are 
irksome at fi rst, but in the mouth, they off er little 
pricks for about twenty-four hours or less. In your 
hands, they last for a few days. Harvest the pads 
and fruit by impaling them with a sharp stick and 
pulling or cutting them free of the plant. Th en 
pass them through the fl ames of a fi re to burn off 
the spines and stickers. Once the pads are free of 
deterrents, they can be sliced and dried.

Saguaro and mesquite also off er tasty foods, 
although work is required to obtain the nutrients. 
I have used saguaro ribs to knock the fruit off of 
the plants, after which I cut them open and 
scooped out the red insides—some of which I ate 
while I dried the rest. Th e many little seeds can be 
dried and eaten or ground into a paste or fl ourlike 
substance and added to cereals. Mesquite requires 
yet more work. You can harvest the pods directly 
from the tree and then lay them out to dry; this is 
followed by shelling and pounding or grinding 
the pods into fl our.

In order to capitalize on the abundance of 
crops in your area, it is wise to prepare ahead of 
time. For succulent fruits like berries, I have got-
ten rock slabs and pecked grooves in some of 
them to channel the juice of the mashed fruit to a 
container below. I also wound cordage around 
other rocks in the place of grooves to prevent the 
fruit mush from sliding down. With the cordage 
and a hot fi re, the juice quickly thickened and 
dried with the mush, adding to the amount of fi n-

ished product. I smeared the crushed berries into 
a jamlike consistency on drying rocks, then 
spread the berry paste evenly over the rocks. I 
then propped up the rocks at a steep angle facing 
a bed of coals in the fi re pit.

It is important that you not cook or burn the 
mush, only dry it. A good gauge is to watch the 
drippings; if they start smoking, pull the rock 
back carefully. Keep monitoring the berry mush 
until the steam coming off of it is greatly reduced. 
Th en set the rock aside to cool. It will take some 
trial and error until you get it just right. For apples 
and other more cohesive fruit that can stay intact 
through slicing, the racks described below for 
drying meat work well.

If you leave the mashed berries near the heat 
for a shorter period of time, you will end up with 
sticky fruit leather, whereas a longer exposure will 
result in fruit chips (easily reconstituted with 
water). Th e chips will last indefi nitely if they are 
kept dry—a tall order in humid conditions. A 
good idea is to store them in a well-dried-out, 
pine bark box in the raft ers of your shelter or in a 
protected location where the heat of your fi re will 
regularly dry the air around them.

Drying Meat

Th e meat that we eat nowadays is so full of spices, 
preservatives, and foreign fl avors that few people 
can really diff erentiate between venison and beef. 
Th is is not to suggest that all meat prepared in the 
wild must be eaten with no spices, but merely that 
the true fl avor should not be drowned out, only 
enhanced. Contrary to popular belief, all meat 
does not taste like chicken, and each has its own 
unique qualities and fl avors.
 Without the aid of cold weather to preserve 
meat, utilizing an entire deer carcass before it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

135

begins to rot requires a great many mouths, a 
large appetite, or another way of preserving it, 
such as drying. Survival has traditionally been a 
group eff ort, with each person specializing in a 
few skill areas. Th is made for easier utilization of 
a large animal carcass and therefore was not as 
daunting of a task as it was for an individual.
 Drying the meat of an entire deer carcass is 
not diffi cult, but it is time consuming, and in 
warm weather you must tend the meat and fi re 
continually. Th e fi rst time I dried the meat of a 
deer, it took two and a half days. My weather-
forecasting skills (or lack thereof) detected rain 
only once it started falling; thus, a big, sustained 
fi re was needed to keep the meat from spoiling.
 Th ere are a few important points to keep in 
mind when drying meat.

• 

• 

• 

Th e goal is to 
dry the meat in a number of 
hours, not cook it. Cooked meat will spoil, 
and bad meat will make you sick.
Flies must be kept away from the meat, and 
the meat must be kept clean prior to drying. It 
is a good idea to have a fi re next to your work 
area to help keep fl ies away. A fresh piece of 
meat dropped on the ground will have all 
manner of things stuck to it, both visible and 
microscopic. I use the animal’s hide as a work 
surface for the meat as I prepare it for the 
rack.
Wide crossbars on the rack will prevent 
speedy drying of the meat that is in contact 
with the wood and will require the need for 
regular shift ing to expose its entirety to warm, 
dry air.

 Drying racks are simple affairs. Build one 
even before you begin to hunt. Large animals may 
require more than one rack.

Drying rack

Larger constructions have a main skeleton of 
heavier sticks for support (one to two inches in 
diameter) and thinner cross sticks on which to 
hang the meat. Smaller racks can be built entirely 
out of thin sticks (one-half inch in diameter). 
Make your rack freestanding and sturdy enough 
to be moved when it is loaded with meat.

Let’s assume that the animal has already been 
skinned and gutted and is either hanging from a 
tree or lying on the green hide (see “Carcass Care” 
in Chapter 13). In addition to your drying rack 
and a fi re, you’ll need a cutting board. A piece of 
pine bark, inner side up, works well. (See “Bark 
Containers” under “Cooking Containers” in 
Chapter 17 for details on working with bark.)

 
 
 
13 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

1. Meat is muscle and is divided into easily 
defi nable pieces that are separated by a 
thin membrane. Remove the fat and 
 separate the muscle groups in the 
hindquarters.

2. Work your way up the carcass toward the 
head. Some parts, like the ribs, may be 
put directly on the fire for immediate 
consumption.

3. Set aside a choice bit like the tenderloins 
or a piece of the back strap; the rest is for 
jerky.

4. Looking at the meat, you will notice that it 
has a “grain” formed of parallel muscle 
strands. Tough jerky is cut along the grain 
(the same direction as the muscle fi ber), 
and soft jerky is cut across the grain. I like 
it either way. Th e meat is sliced into one-
eighth-inch-thick pieces and as long and 
wide as is manageable.

5. If you’ve harvested some spices, now is a 
good time to rub them into the meat. Gar-
lic mustard, wild leeks, wild garlic, chives, 
and other mustards are some of my favor-
ites. Look in a fi eld guide to fi nd out what 
is in season, and make sure that you are 
100 percent positive of the plant’s identity 
and edibility.

6. Place the pieces of meat on the rack close 

together but not touching.

 Once the drying process starts, you need to 
keep at it until the meat is dry. For small quanti-
ties of meat, I’ll place the rack on the leeward side 
of the fi re so that the breeze blows warm, dry air 
over it. If it is windy, you can create a windbreak 
with stacked wood, hide, cloth, or stone, or, better 
yet, you can fi nd a more sheltered area in which to 
work. At no time should the meat be hot to the 

The grain on meat

touch. You should be able to place your hand any-
where over the rack and keep it there indefi nitely, 
but you should also be able to feel the constant 
warmth of the fi re. When it is done, the jerky 
should be dry enough to crack when you bend it, 
but it shouldn’t be brittle. Nor should it be greasy 
or shiny. Shininess oft en indicates fat in the meat, 
which must be removed in order to prevent the 
meat from becoming rancid.

Pemmican

Pemmican is a mixture of rendered fat, jerky, and 
dried berries. Because fat is fl ammable, a great 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F O O D A N D D R I N K 

137

 When the fat chunks have been greatly 
reduced or have disappeared altogether, any 
chunks fl oating on top should be removed, along 
with any impurities that you can see. Let the water 
cool. When the fat is cool, it will congeal and fl oat, 
and you can lift it off the water. You can grind up 
jerky and dried fruit between two stones or pul-
verize them with a stick, then add them to the fat.
 As long as it is kept dry, pemmican will last 
indefi nitely. I have had some get wet, and the 
waterproofi ng that the fat provides does a good 
job. Th e berries and meat exposed to water will 
get nasty, though, so do try to keep the pem-
mican dry.

way to render it in a primitive situation is to rock-
boil water and add chunks of venison fat to it. It 
takes a lot of hot rocks, but the end results are 
great. Another method that works well is to use 
your pecked berry-drying rock on which to place 
chunks of fat to heat, then you simply let the fat 
run off . Th is is fi nicky work, as you don’t want the 
fat to burn, just melt. And, unlike pork fat, veni-
son fat has a high melting point; woodchuck, 
waterfowl, and other animal fats have lower melt-
ing points. Th e trade-off is that pemmican from 
venison fat will not melt and leak as easily when it 
warms up. I have had a hunk of venison pemmi-
can with dried raspberries in my hunting jacket 
pocket for more than a year now and nibble on it 
now and then; it tastes the same as the day I 
made it.

 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 0

FISHING

Wading upstream in a long, shallow pool, I 

continue to probe under the banks with my 
hands. Th e water is like ice, and it doesn’t help 
that I’m in the shadow of the streamside trees, 
sheltered from the warm touch of the sun. At one 
point, I force my goose-bump-covered body 
beneath the surface to reach farther back under 
the bank. Aha! Th e unmistakable, smooth side of 
a fi sh brushes my fi ngertips and moves even far-
ther back beneath the bank. I am no longer cold—
the fi sh has my attention—and I consciously calm 
the excitement within me; it is as if the water 
embraces me.

Lying in a shallow pool, my nose, one eye, and 
a quarter of my mouth are all that are exposed to 
air. My fi ngers, swaying like grass in the current, 
slowly move upstream, searching. Th ere! A trout, 
and a big one, too! I’ve found the alpha trout of 
this pool, hiding about three feet back under the 
bank. I can’t see it, but I can taste it. I dance my 
fi ngers gently along its lower side, envisioning 
how the fi sh is sitting in its hiding place.

I’m going to need two hands! My right hand 
locates the gills, thumb gently caressing one side 
and middle fi nger stroking the other, while my 
left hand cups underneath, about six inches from 
the trout’s tail. I am relaxed and do not rush. 

Th en, I jam my thumb and middle fi nger together 
through the gills, and at the same time, I clamp 
the tail. I’ve got the fi sh! Slowly, I emerge from 
beneath the bank and marvel at this magnifi cent 
trout measuring eighteen inches in length. If it 
were not for my hunger, I would surely return this 
beautiful creature to its waters.
 As it was, he cooked up quite nicely. I am still 
grateful.

WHAT METHOD?

Th e fl ow and characteristics of the water are what 
dictate whether you should hunt with a spear or 
with your hands. In pools that have little or no 
cover for fi sh, a spear is preferable, whereas in 
moving water and in pools that have cover (over-
hanging banks, big rocks, clumps of grass, root 
systems), hand fi shing may work the best. Trying 
to dislodge your spear from a tangle of roots while 
trout are nibbling your toes is a humbling experi-
ence not easily forgotten. In still water, especially 
with lots of plant life on or near the surface, a hook 
and line can yield the best results. (See the section 
on hook-and-line fi shing later in this chapter.) 

139

 
 
14 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

I really enjoy both hand fi shing and spearfi sh-
ing in pools, where the varying challenges are 
consistently rewarding. Pools without vegetation 
or hiding spots tend to house skittish trout. With-
out vegetation, fi sh do not become accustomed to 
being touched, and without hiding spots, they 
will swim laps around you. It’s almost impossible 
to hunt with hands in these situations, and a spear 
is the right approach. Or, you can create hiding 
spots, then use your hands. Stack rocks to form 
niches, or add logs and brush where the fi sh will 
feel safe. Th en, check these spots in about a week.

HAND FISHING

Over the years, I have found only literary tidbits 
on hand fi shing. Some writers tell about slowly 
mesmerizing the fi sh by stroking its belly. Others 
suggest placing your hands below a trout and 
quickly fl ipping it onto shore. One source even 
suggests using your hands to make a false cave 
entrance to lure the trout. Once the fi sh is in your 
hands, you’re supposed to simply grab the trout. 
Maybe these techniques really work, but I still 
haven’t caught a trout using them. What follows 
are some of the fi sh-hunting techniques I have 
used and taught with great success in streams and 
shallow rivers. Th e smallest seasonal streams can 
have a variety of fi sh in them, especially if their 
source is a swamp or lake. Some fi sh, like trout, 
are easier to catch than others, and I prefer them 
due to their taste, their lack of pointy spines on 
which to injure your hand, and the fact that they 
fi nd nooks and crannies in which to hide thus 
making them easier to catch. Some streams off er 
few hiding spots or, for other reasons unknown to 
me, are home to trout so skittish that catching 

them in the manner described below is very hard 
if not impossible. Other streams are so well suited 
to this method that it is possible to fi ll your kreel 
in minutes.

Finding Fish

I do well hand fi shing in shallow streams and riv-
ers that have pools of varying size, depth, and 
fl ow. Even ankle-deep streams with intermittent 
pools can hold massive trout. I recommend mov-
ing upstream for two reasons. First, any sediment 
that you stir up will not cloud your fi shing area, 
and second, trout tend to face into the current—
they are hard enough to stalk without moving 
directly in their fi eld of vision.
 As water moves over the riverbed, areas of 
both swift and still water are created. Even within 
white-water rapids there are pockets of still water. 
It is in these pockets, usually underneath or on 
the downstream side of rocks or other objects, 
that trout wait for food to swirl in on the current. 
Many times I have given a quick jab with my hand 
into an unlikely spot, only to have a trout go 
streaking off . To avoid this, move your hands with 
the same characteristics of the water in which 
they are immersed. Just because the surface may 
be roiling white-water does not mean that the 
conditions a foot below are the same. Check 
under and around rocks that might hide a trout. 
Even at the base of waterfalls, big or small, you 
will oft en fi nd calm water; check these areas for 
trout. Feel with your hands along the edges of 
rapids, because it is not always apparent where or 
how far the river has cut into the bank. In long, 
still, shallow pools, make sure to check under 
large rocks, under banks, and in sedge clumps, 
using your hands to “look” for holes leading into 
cavities that may house trout.

 
 
FISHING 

141

 Th e foundations of bridges are oft en scoured 
out, creating perfect trout traps. Floods also cre-
ate ideal trout-hunting grounds—some better for 
the hunter, and some better for the trout. Th e root 
systems of downed trees, trees along banks, and 
trees transported by fl oods create a myriad of hid-
ing spots, some of which may be inaccessible to 
the hunter. Certain situations require exploring 
hideouts and catching trout while you are com-
pletely submerged, which isn’t as tough as it 
sounds once you get some practice.

In my experience, the biggest trout in a given 
pool use two hiding spots. Th ey are also the most 
relaxed of all the fi sh in the pool, because they are 
at the top of the pecking order. Th us, the larger 
the trout, oft en the easier they are to catch. Th ey 
are used to smaller fi sh wriggling up against them 
in tight quarters. I found a hole in a shale river-
bank that led to a small cavern about two feet long 
and one foot wide. Th ere were so many trout in 
there that they left no room for the water! So, 
spook the trout and see the available sizes and 
where they are hiding.

Be persistent. I remember a pool with a fi ve-
foot, submerged rock face. Aft er several frustrat-
ing visits to the pool, where the fish just 
disappeared, I fi nally found a small hole that led 
into a cavity. It was jammed with fi sh and made 
for easy fi shing! Explore every possibility and 
refuse to become trapped into thinking that you 
know where trout will and will not be. I am con-
tinually surprised.

It is important to learn about the various haz-
ards in your hunting area, such as pollution, 
snakes, and snapping turtles. I’ve grabbed many 
northern snappers by the head underwater with 
no ill eff ects, but the alligators and alligator snap-
pers of the South would be another story entirely. 
In pools that are four feet and deeper, keep a wary 

eye out for beavers. Th ey do not seem to mind 
underwater visitors as long as you do not corner 
them or appear threatening.

Technique

Probably 85 percent of the time, you will not be 
able to see the trout you are trying to catch. Th is 
means that your fi ngers must become your eyes 
under the water. When you reach under a river-
bank “looking” for trout, keep your fi ngers limp 
like seaweed. Let them fl ow as if with the current, 
exploring every possible hiding spot. Most trout 
are used to having bits of grass and other debris 
touch them as it fl oats past. Th ey are not, however, 
used to being goosed.

I once reached under a bank for a trout only to 
fi nd a twelve-pound snapping turtle; it was quite 
tasty. I’ve found snakes that way, too—kind of 
chewy and tasteless, although their eggs were 
delicious when poached. Once you’ve felt a trout, 
you’ll never mistake anything else for one. Be 
careful and count all of your fi ngers aft er each 
trip.

Let’s stick with trout. Once you come in con-
tact with a fi sh, stay relaxed! Slowly and gently 
feel along its body to locate its head and deter-
mine its size. Don’t take anything too small, 
although too small depends upon how hungry 
you are. Small fry are not bad when toasted, and 
you can eat them, heads and all.

If the fi sh is fourteen inches or bigger, use two 
hands when you are fishing. Cup both hands 
under the fi sh, keeping one hand near the little 
fi ns just in front of the tail. Use the thumb and 
middle fi nger of your other hand to locate the 
gills. Do not apply pressure yet. But when you do, 
you must be fast and severe. Drive your thumb 
and middle fi nger into each other through the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

gills while gripping the tail with your other hand. 
If the fi sh is in a cavity, you can pin the trout 
against the wall or roof without touching the gills. 
Do this if you do not have access to the gills or 
mouth. Once you have grabbed the fi sh in this 
manner, it will struggle once and then relax. At 
this point, you can also relax, but only slightly. 
Once again, the fi sh will struggle, aft er which you 
can pull it out with minimal fuss. Make sure that 
you have a good hold on the trout before you 
remove it from the water.

Some places where trout hide may not allow 
you access to both gills, in which case you might 
use one gill and the mouth instead. Be careful, 
though, because large trout have teeth that can 
puncture even a callused hand. Th e pain is really 
not that bad—just a pinprick—but if you cannot 
handle that, you don’t deserve the trout.
 Grabbing the fi sh through the gills damages it 
permanently, and if the fi sh is returned to the 
water, it will die. If you want to practice catch and 

Handgripping a small trout

release, here is a way to catch fi sh without causing 
any immediate harm. Place your hand under the 
fi sh as usual, except this time, have the fi sh lie 
diagonally across your palm so that its head 
comes between your middle and index fi ngers 
and the tail just touches your wrist. By squeezing 
your fi ngers together and simultaneously making 
a fi st, you can eff ectively immobilize the fi sh. Be 
careful not to squeeze hard. Return the fi sh to the 
stream gently, holding it in its normal attitude 
(facing into the current, right side up) until it 
regains its equilibrium and swims off on its own.
 Trout hunting by hand is tremendous fun and 
very rewarding. It’s a great way to see familiar 
land from a new perspective and provides you 
with a fantastic meal using simple tools. Remem-
ber, though, that you are taking a life. It is impor-
tant to give thanks and maintain proper respect. 
Check with your local Department of Fish and 
Game regarding the legality of this activity in 
your area, and avoid overfi shing areas. We all 
want to continue fishing trout well into the 
future.

SPEARFISHING

Spears are simple to make and easy to use. Th e 
following design is for pinning, not puncturing, 
the fi sh.

1. Find a straight sapling that is eight to 
twelve feet long and no thicker than one 
and one-half inches at the base.

2. Sharpen the thick end to a point aft er cut-
ting off all of the limbs. Leaving the bark 
on is a good idea, because it aids in cam-
oufl aging the spear.

 
 
 
 
FISHING 

143

 When you spot a fish along the bottom, 
approach it from behind to avoid spooking it. 
Bring the spear directly over it (vertical is nice but 
not imperative) so that two of the four points 
straddle the “neck” just behind the gills. Th e other 
two points of the spear lie farther back. Th e splay 
of the points should be such that, when the spear 
is jabbed downward, the body of the fi sh forces 
the points farther apart. Aft er a successful thrust, 
you can reach down and recover the trout, or, 
with a sharp, quick twist of the spear, you can 
break the trout’s neck.
 Using the spear is rather self-explanatory, 
although there are some defi nite no-nos. Th e tip 
of the spear must be practically touching the fi sh 
if you hope to be successful, so don’t strike pre-
maturely from too far away. Th e most common 
mistake occurs during the “windup”—there 
shouldn’t be one. When you are in position and 
ready for the fi nal jab, do not pull the spear away 
from the fi sh. Th e fi sh is not behind you. To avoid 
this impulse, lean forward until you start to tip, 
and use that momentum to add force and speed 
to the thrust. Because the spear tip is already in 
the water, refraction is not an issue—you can 
clearly see the spear tip in relation to the fi sh. (If 
you are shooting fi sh with a bow and arrow, how-
ever, you will need to aim low to account for 
refraction. How low depends upon the lateral dis-
tance from yourself to the fi sh; the greater the dis-
tance, the lower the aiming point.)

Sharp spears for puncturing fi sh work well in 
situations that allow for side shots (see Chap-
ter 12). Th e side of a fi sh presents a larger target, 
and it is far soft er than the dorsal (back) area. In 
addition, a missed strike from the side is less likely 
to break or dull stone, bone, or wood spear tips.
 Th e spear is adaptable, so use your intelli-
gence and apply it as needed. For example, Mark 

Spear making

3. About nine inches down the shaft from 
the point, tightly wrap some cordage, wet 
rawhide, or other string, and tie it off .
4. With a sturdy knife, create a split from the 
tip to the tied-off string. Th e string will 
keep the split from running too far down 
the shaft ; therefore, it must always be left 
in place.

5. Now, make a second split perpendicular 
to the fi rst one. Th is gives you four sec-
tions at the tip of your spear. Sharpen each 
one.

6. Jam a twig into each of the two splits, 
splaying the tips apart. Th ese twigs can be 
tied in place or held in by friction. I use 
the friction method, because it allows for a 
quick change of twig. If the twigs are too 
big for the fi sh I am hunting, I can put 
smaller ones in, thus reducing the splay of 
the prongs. Another option is to put a 
larger twig in one slot and a smaller one in 
the other, providing you with two size 
options.

 
 
 
 
 
 
14 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Elbroch and I came across a hole in a stream bank 
a few feet above the water. I crawled in and found 
a glasslike pool. It was connected to the river 
below the waterline, diff using and giving a bluish 
cast to the light. Suspended in the water hung two 
beautiful trout. We tried unsuccessfully for awhile 
to catch one. I used my hands from inside the 
cave, and Mark used a spear from the outside. We 
switched back and forth, getting hungrier and 
colder with each attempt, both wanting to be the 
one to catch supper and neither wanting to be the 
one to call it quits. Th e problem in the cave was 
that the trout were too skittish and the area too 
confi ned. Outside the cave, we only got occasional 
glimpses of the trout before they moved too far 
back into the cave for us to see.

In the end, Mark stood in the river outside the 
cave with the spear tip just inside the cave by way 
of the underwater entry, while I was lying in the 
cave, giving him instructions on what direction 
and how far to move the spear. When he had the 
spear positioned near the trout, I gave him the 
word. Th e water clouded with his lunge, and I 
couldn’t see a thing. Slowly and carefully, I moved 
my hand through the water, found the spear shaft , 
and moved down it to the tip. Gravel!?! Mark had 
jabbed so hard that he’d sunk that trout a couple 
of inches into the gravel. I managed to dig it up 
and grab it, and together we shared dinner. Th e 
lesson? Be fl exible.

HOOK AND LINE

While I was in the Australian outback, I saw 
many people fi sh with a hand line. Th e accuracy 
of the placement of the baited hook easily matched 
that of a fi sherman using a rod.

 Many of us have some experience with fi shing 
with a hook and line. While line fi shing is possi-
ble with primitive setups, it is tricky to learn and 
takes a lot of time to make the gear; however, fi ft y 
feet of eight-pound test line and a few fi shing 
hooks take up very little space and weigh next to 
nothing and are thus a good addition to a pack, 
survival kit, or glove box.

If you are fi shing in an area with fi sh that 
weigh more than a few pounds, attaching the tail 
end of the line to a sturdy stick is a good idea. A 
large fi sh can easily pull the fi shing line out of 
your hands, causing cuts and the loss of valuable 
gear. Th e stick gives you an anchor to help pull in 
the fi sh.

Some bodies of water have more fi sh than 
 others and thus give you a greater chance of suc-
cess with any hook. If you want to improve your 
ability as a fi sherman, regardless of your level of 
skill, then it is important to ask yourself these 
questions:

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

Why would a fi sh bite my hook?
Where is food more abundant?
Where does nutrient-rich water fl ow into this 
lake or that pond?
When are fi sh feeding?
Are conditions for fi shing better in the rain 
or in the sun, in the early morning or the 
evening?
What do fi sh really like to eat?
Do bass like mice better than frogs?

 Asking questions teaches you to be more 
aware as you seek out the answers. You might 
notice something that others may not. Perhaps 
fi sh really like a particular type of caterpillar that 
you saw fall into the creek and be devoured by a 
trout.

 
 
 
 
FISHING 

145

1. Draw two parallel score lines around the 
bone, then score deeply along the lines 
with a knife or other sharp object.

Hooks and Bait

Th e basic principle behind hooking a fi sh is lodg-
ing something attached to a string in the fi sh’s 
mouth or stomach. Fish as a general rule do not 
chew their food; therefore, if the object is appeal-
ing enough, they will simply swallow it. Conse-
quently, a simple, pointed piece of bone with a 
string tied to the middle oft en does the trick.

Toe bone marked for cutting

2. Split the bone along the score lines, and 
carefully carve or abrade away unneeded 
bone.

Gorge and shank

 Th e toe bones of a deer are the right shape for 
making a conventional hook. A slice out of the 
center of the bone works well. Th e edge pieces of 
the same bone need more work but are stronger. 
Follow these steps:

Toe bone showing area removed

3. Do not make an eye for the fi shing line. 
Instead, thin the shaft below the top end, 
leaving a wider portion or button at the 
top to keep the line from slipping off .
4. Once the line is tied, dab pine pitch over 

the knot and sprinkle it with ash.

Toe bone

 
 
 
 
 
14 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

5. Slide a squirrel femur with both ends 
removed down the line to the hook. Th is 
protects the line from sharp teeth and 
barbs in the fi sh’s mouth.

mice hooked through the hide. Other baits 
include anything that will draw fish, such as 
bread, dead worms found in puddles aft er a rain, 
and pieces of meat, feathers, or refl ective objects 
such as pieces of shell.

Techniques

Th ere are many diff erent ways to fi sh, and which 
one works best depends on the sort of fi sh you are 
targeting. Do you jerk the bait on the surface or 
let it sit on the bottom? Generally, I let live bait 
stay on or near the surface with little movement 
from me. Crayfi sh and minnows tend to do better 
deeper down, and dead bait seems to work well 
on top as well as down below. Experiment and see 
what works for you in your area. Have fun, and 
remember, fi shing is an art.
 To set your bait at a specifi c depth, say, for 
example, three feet below the surface, tie a rock 
one foot from the hook and a wooden bobber that 
is big enough to fl oat the weight of the rock four 
feet above the stone. If your hook tangles with the 
rest of the gear, you can tie a stick to the line 
between the stone and the hook, with the line 
wrapped around the stick. It holds the rig at depth 
and keeps the baited hook a given distance from 
the weight. It also prevents tangling and keeps the 
entire rig from appearing too big.
 Another option is to place your bait a given 
distance off of the bottom. For this, your bobber 
should be buoyant enough to fl oat the hook and 
bait but not so buoyant to fl oat the sinker. If, for 
example, you want your bait three feet off the bot-
tom, tie a bobber (fl oat) six to twelve inches from 
the hook; three feet farther along the fi shing line, 
add the weight. Th e bobber will fl oat up three feet 
from the weight on the bottom, keeping your 
baited hook where you want it.

Hook and leader

 Another good hook is a wishbone from the 
breast of a bird with one end broken and abraded 
to a fi ne point at about midshaft .

Wishbone

Live bait, while oft en very eff ective, can be 
hard to fi nd and tough for some people to use. 
Some excellent live baits are frogs hooked through 
the upper leg, small fish hooked through the 
mouth, crayfish hooked through the tail, and 

 
 
 
FISHING 

147

primitive hook with no barb. Don’t attempt to set 
the hook or play the fi sh; just apply constant and 
steady back pressure. Don’t stop your backward 
pull when the fi sh is just on the shore; make sure 
that the fi sh is well enough away from the water 
so that no amount of fl opping about will land that 
fi sh back in the water. A stick or stone can be used 
to fi nish off the fi sh, or you can break its neck by 
bending the head back until the nose touches the 
spine.

FISH POISON

I have found and heard plenty of third-party 
anecdotal information on fi sh poisons, but noth-
ing concrete, at least not for North America. 
Much is still to be tested and rediscovered, but the 
one in which I have enough experience on which 
to draw is black walnut.
 Th e black walnut has juglone toxin in all parts 
of the tree, but the strongest concentration is in 
the hulls of fresh nuts. Every fall, the green, round 
walnuts, a little smaller than a baseball, fall from 
the trees. Th e hulls can be ripped from the shell 
by hand (although they will stain your skin for 
about a week), then squeezed by hand underwater 
in a dammed pool with very little fl ow. Another 
method is to make a water-and-hull solution and 
then pour it all in at the upstream end of the pool. 
You can see the cloud of dye clearly spread 
through the pool, and as soon as it contacts fi sh, 
they swim as if attempting to get out of the cloud. 
Th ey will fl are their gill covers and come to the 
surface as they attempt to run more water over 
their gills for oxygen. In a few minutes, they are 
easily grabbed by hand or basket. Th e taste is not 
altered in any noticeable way, but any prolonged 

Sinker setup

 Th e following directions for casting assume 
that you are right-handed. Reverse the procedure 
if you’re a left y.

1. Coil the cordage loosely on your left hand, 
leaving about two feet of slack on the end 
with the hook.

2. With your right hand, spin the baited 
hook around in a clockwise circle so that 
your target area is at nine o’clock, the 
ground is at six o’clock, and the area 
behind you is at three o’clock.

3. Release on the upswing. Th e line should 
uncoil off of your left hand (hold onto the 
end) and land your hook about fifteen 
feet out.

 The method for pulling in a fish that I’ve 
found to work the best is to simply walk backward 
away from the water and pull the fi sh onto shore. 
Th is is especially important if you are using a 

 
 
 
 
14 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

exposure will kill all the fi sh in the pool; there-
fore, use this as a last resort.
 Th e hulls can be removed from fresh nuts and 
dried for later use, but only as a material dye. Th e 
juglone breaks down within about a week, ren-
dering it useless for killing fi sh. Aft er you dose a 
pool, check it again about six hours later to collect 
any fi sh that may have died and were missed. 
Th ese remaining fi sh will be covered in a heavy 
coat of slime that will drip off when they are 
picked up (like egg white). Wash them off and 
cook them for a great meal!

Be advised that poisons are indiscriminate 
killers and should be used only as a last resort. 
I do know the fi sh are able to recover in clean 
water if the exposure was short or the dose mild. 

In an attempt to get a handle on it, I dosed a 
250-gallon pool with fourteen fresh hulls. Th ere 
were two trout, seven inches and eleven inches. 
Th e eff ect was immediately noticeable when the 
toxin came in contact with the fi sh and made 
them catchable within about ten minutes. 
Reopening the fl ow of clear water into the pool 
appeared to have a positive eff ect on the fi sh, 
although six hours later all of the minnows and 
fi sh were dead. Th e seven-inch trout was gone 
and the eleven-inch fi sh remained, but it was 
dead and covered in slime. I know from experi-
ence that this technique works as a method for 
obtaining fish, but due to its indiscriminate 
nature, I will no longer use it except in a survival 
situation. 

 
 
C H A P T E R 1 1

TR APPING

How do you hunt multiple locations while at the 

same time lounging in camp? Traps are used to 
hold or kill an animal without direct manipula-
tion by, and therefore oft en in the absence of, the 
hunter. Hunting requires time and energy and 
does not guarantee success, but traps are hunters 
with great patience. Th ey never tire, cramp, or 
lose interest. Rather than stalking and waiting, 
you can use your time and energy for trapping by 
locating excellent set areas and checking the traps 
once they are in place. Yet trapping is an art that 
is honed through trial and error. Making the 
traps is the simplest aspect of trapping.
 Trapping is used primarily when you are stay-
ing in one location, because it allows you to 
become familiar with the area and the game pres-
ent. It is possible to trap successfully while on the 
move, but this requires a greater tracking ability 
in order to identify sites that will be productive 
within a twelve- to twenty-four-hour window. 
Staying in one location while trapping is condu-
cive to setting a trapline—a series of traps that are 
set in a loop or circuit that can be checked twice 
daily. Trapping on the move is better suited to set-
ting a few traps that are fairly close to camp—this 
allows for a minimum time investment to set, 
check, and retrieve the traps.

SET LOCATIONS AND BAITS

Animals have a home range within which they 
sleep, den, and move to and from feeding areas 
and day beds. Th e best place to trap an animal 
with a baited set is on the edge of a feeding area. 
Th is way, the animal is already in a feeding mind-
set and may be curious about a diff erent food.

Incidental, or nonbaited, traps are best set 
over den entrances and along trails or runs that 
are used exclusively by your quarry. (On larger 
trails, other animals will likely walk through your 
set and destroy it.) If a rabbit is heading to a clover 
patch, it is not likely to stop on the way for some 
wilting clover lying on the ground, but it may not 
notice a noose placed in the trail.

Look at a feeding area to see what foods are 
plentiful. For example, if the edge of a clover fi eld 
is the feeding area of a rabbit, you probably won’t 
have much luck using clover as bait. However, red 
maple buds or a piece of wild apple may bring 
success. Good bait is oft en food that an animal 
would like to eat but that is not readily available. 
One option is to leave a number of prospective 
baits close together in the feeding area overnight, 
then check in the morning to see which ones have 
been eaten.

149

 
 
15 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

TYPES OF TR APS

Traps can be classifi ed in terms of: (a) where the 
energy to catch the animal comes from, (b) why 
the animal goes to the trap, and (c) the killing or 
holding mechanism.
 Th e energy required to hold or kill an animal 
comes from one of three sources: the animal’s 
weight or movement, the contraction of a spring 
stick (sapling or branch), or the falling of a weight 
or counterweight.
 Th e animal trips the trap either because bait is 
attached to a trigger or there is incidental contact 
with a trigger or noose due to placement of the 
trap.
 Th ere are three main types of killing or hold-
ing mechanisms:

• 

• 

• 

Snares use strong cordage and a noose or net 
to hold or kill the prey.
Deadfall and live-capture traps use a weight 
or basket in combination with gravity to crush 
or capture the animal.
Pit traps use a concealed hole to hold (or kill 
by way of stakes in the bottom) game.

Peg Snare

Th is particular trap is easy to set, and there is no 
worry of a spring stick accidentally being tripped 
or taking a set (losing its springiness and gaining 
a memory of its bent state while the trap is set). 
Th is trap is pretty tough on the animal as there is 
no quick killing mechanism. It is the animal’s 
struggling that causes death due to strangulation.

Type: Nonbaited snare.

Materials: Strong cordage and a peg.

Placement: Trail or run, den openings, water 

entrances.

Directions: 

1. Drive a peg into the ground near the trail 

or run.

2. Tie cordage to the base of the peg.
3. Make a noose and set it in the trail. If nec-
essary, support it in the open position with 
a few twigs or grasses. Make the noose a 
little larger than the animal’s head so that, 
as the animal moves down the trail, its 
head, but not its shoulders, passes through 
the noose.

 When the noose tightens from the animal’s 
forward movement, the animal panics and stran-
gles itself.

Peg snare

T-Bar Snare

Th is is a fairly simply trap and one of my favor-
ites, but it does come with a few caveats. First, a 
bent sapling left too long in the set position will 
loose its springiness and be ineffective when 
tripped. Sometimes it may retain enough spring 
to tighten the noose on the animal’s throat but 

 
 
 
 
TR APPING 

151

not enough to swift ly lift it and break its neck. 
Both scenarios work, but the fi rst is to be avoided 
if possible as the meat will taste particularly 
gamey, and the animal will have a lengthy battle 
before it fi nally succumbs to the noose. Second, 
this trap can be easily tripped in windy weather.

Type: Baited snare.

Materials: Flexible sapling, two notched sticks, 

a T-bar (a T-shaped section of a sapling trunk 
with a branch growing perpendicular to it), a 
number of twigs, and strong cordage.

Placement: Near feeding areas.

Directions:

1. Harvest two sticks that are about ten 
inches in length, and sharpen one end of 
each stick.

2. An inch from the other end of each stick, 
carve a notch so that when the pointed 
ends are in the ground, the top of the 
notch will be horizontal and capable of 
preventing the squared ends of the T-bar 
from moving upward.

3. Cut the horizontal part of the T-bar piece 
to about six inches in length (for squir-
rels), with the branch at the center.

4. Trim the vertical leg of the T-bar to two 
inches in length, and sharpen the end to 
receive the bait.

5. Square both ends so that they correspond 

to the notches in the pointed sticks.

6. Tie a noose and a length of cordage to the 
center of the T-bar, and bring everything 
to the set area.

7. To determine the exact set location, bend 
a sapling so that the top comes down to 
within two feet from the ground.

T-bar set

8. Remove a number of the branches to allow 
the sapling to snap quickly erect. To lend 
strength and snap to your spring stick, 
parallel branches or neighboring saplings 
can be tied to one another so as to work in 
unison.

9. With the tip of the sapling two feet from 
the ground, place your T-bar directly 
under it.

 10. Attach the cordage to the sapling, place 
the bait on the pointed stick, and set the 
T-bar in the notches.

 11. Place the noose around the T-bar, lift ing it 
off the ground with twigs so that the ani-
mal must extend its head through the 
noose to get the bait.

 Th e force used to remove the bait twists and 
frees the T-bar from the notches, allowing the 
sapling to snap upward. Th is tightens the noose 
and kills the animal.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough room for the cordage to move 
without a problem.

 When an animal hits the noose, the rock falls 
off of its perch and plummets toward the ground. 
Th e animal is pulled swift ly upward until it hits 
the bottom of the Y branch and dies. For animals 
near water, the weight can be perched such that it 
falls into water deep enough to pull the animal 
below the surface, drowning it.

152 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

 Th e T-bar snare can be set with the bait branch 
horizontal for an approach from above. In this 
case, place twigs around the trap as a fence to pre-
vent an animal from going under the noose. Th e 
bait branch can also point downward for an 
approach from the front or back (using two 
nooses).

Keeper Snare

Th is trap is great when the opportunity presents 
itself. Don’t make the same mistake I made when I 
spent hours searching for the right spot to take this 
trap. I was so determined to use it that I missed 
countless opportunities to set other traps better 
suited to the location. Good to have in your reper-
toire, but don’t make it the only trap you know.

Type: Nonbaited snare.

Materials: Strong cordage and a rock or a chunk 
of wood that weighs three or more times the 
weight of the target species.

Placement: Trails and runs in wooded areas, 

den openings, water entrances.

Directions:

1. Set a noose on a trail or over a den 

Keeper snare

opening.

2. Run the cordage from the noose up 
through a Y in a branch and onto another 
branch above that.

3. Tie a weight to the end of the cordage, and 
place it on the higher branch in such a way 
that it will fall with a little tug on the snare 
line.

4. Lash a one-inch-diameter piece of wood 
across the Y just beyond the notch, leaving 

Figure-Four Deadfall

Th is trap is one of the most popular primitive 
traps around. Published in countless journals and 
books from long ago to the present, it has earned 
it’s place in many hearts for it’s simplicity and 
eff ectiveness. If you learn only one trap, make it 
this one!

 
 
 
 
 
Type: Baited and nonbaited deadfall.

Materials: Th ree straight branches, with the size 
depending on the target species, be it mice, 
deer, or something in between. In addition, 
you will need a weight three times that of the 
target species (to kill the animal), or a box or 
basket large enough to hold the animal, plus 
a weight lashed to the top.

Placement: Trail, run, or feeding area.

Components: One upright stick, one diagonal 
stick, and one trigger stick. Th e bait or trig-
ger stick and the diagonal stick are similar in 
length, while the upright stick is longer.

Directions:

1. Square the edge of the upright stick about 
two and one-half inches up, and make a 
wedged tip.

2. Notch the diagonal stick three or more 
inches from one end to correspond with 

TR APPING 

153

the top of the upright stick; make a wedged 
point on the other end.

3. Notch the bait or trigger stick to receive 
the lower end of the diagonal stick; make a 
corresponding notch on the squared edge 
of the upright stick.

4. If you are going to use bait, sharpen the 
end farthest from the diagonal stick. If 
you are not going to use bait, use a branch 
with a few twigs left attached (so that it 
will not impede the falling of the weight).
5. To set the trap, place the notch of the diag-
onal stick on the upright stick. As you put 
the bait or trigger stick in place, apply pres-
sure on the tip of the diagonal stick, then 
substitute your hand with either a log or a 
stone. If the weight tips to either side, drive 
a guide stake in on either side to allow only 
upward or downward movement.

6. If the ground is soft , you may need to add 
a fl at rock underneath the trap as a smash-
ing surface.

A ﬁ gure-four

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

 When the bait is taken, the weight falls, crush-
ing the prey. Note that the greater the angle of the 
weight, the longer it takes to fall. Th is increases 
the chance of the animal escaping. If no large 
rocks are available, you can attach a basket of 
small stones to a log to add weight.
 When you set this trap on a trail, you can sub-
stitute a branch with one end left untrimmed for 
the bait stick. A passing animal that touches any 
of the branches will cause the weight to fall and 
kill the animal. If the branch is too sturdy, it may 
prevent the weight from doing its job.

Snapping-Turtle Trap

Th is trap doubles as a holding pen for a turtle as 
no harm is done when the trap is tripped, the tur-
tle’s point of egress is merely blocked. Remember, 
turtles do not need to eat three meals a day and 
may not visit your trap for a few weeks.

Type: Baited, live capture.

Materials: Cordage; approximately thirty 
one-and-one-quarter-inch-diameter sapling 

pieces that are eighteen to thirty inches long 
with a sharpened end, including two Y sticks; 
a few dinner-plate-size fl at stones; rotten fi sh 
or other meat for bait; and one thin, straight 
trigger stick that is eighteen inches long.

Placement: Lake and swamp shallows, about 

knee-deep.

Directions:

1. Create a horseshoe shape with the sharp-
ened stakes, with the mouth open to 
deeper water. Th e two stakes on either side 
of the horseshoe’s mouth are Y sticks, and 
they will hold the swinging door.

2. Hammer the sharpened stakes into the 
bottom of the swamp to ensure that they 
are fi rmly embedded.

3. Make the width of the trap about six 
inches wider than the size of the turtle you 
want to catch.

4. Have the stakes protrude six inches above 
the surface, and lash them to one another 
to prevent splaying due to pressure from 
the inside.

Turtle trap

 
 
 
 
 
TR APPING 

155

5. Line the bottom of the trap with flat 
stones—the bigger the better—to prevent 
the turtle from digging its way out.

6. To make the door, place one of the sapling 
pieces in the notch of both Y sticks so that 
it spans the mouth; this will be the hinge.
7. Lash sticks to the hinge, four inches apart 
from one notch or mark to the other.
8. Lash an additional stick across the bottom 
of the door parallel to the hinge. When the 
door is placed in the Y sticks, it should be 
able to swing in a full circle.

9. Tie a stone to the inside of the door; the 
stone must be heavy enough to prevent the 
door from fl oating open.

 10. Tie some cordage across the open tops of 
the Y sticks to hold the hinge in place.
 11. Drive a stake into the swamp bottom just 
in front of the mouth of the horseshoe, 
and leave enough protruding to prevent 
the door from swinging outward.
 12. To set the trap, swing the door inward 
until it is parallel with the surface of the 

water, and prop it open with a thin stick or 
reed as a trigger.

 13. Tie a piece of rotten meat to the back of 
the horseshoe, and check the trap once 
a day.

 Once the silt has settled from installation of 
the trap, a snapping turtle, smelling the bait, will 
swim into the trap. Th e trigger stick propping 
open the door will be dislodged as the turtle 
moves toward the bait. When the door closes, 
striking the shell, the turtle will move forward 
toward the bait, allowing the door to close com-
pletely. Th e stake at the entrance prevents the 
door from swinging open, rocks prevent a dig-
ging escape, and the turtle will not be able to 
climb up and over the walls. You can feed the tur-
tle and keep it alive until you are ready to eat it.
 Note: If the horseshoe is not long enough, the 
door will fall onto the turtle’s back without clos-
ing completely, and the turtle will escape. Snap-
ping turtles are strong and fast with their mouths; 
take great care when dealing with them.

 
 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 2

HUNTING WE APONS

There are many weapons and variations of each 

with which you can hunt, including rabbit sticks, 
spears, bolas, and bows and arrows. Some require 
less work to produce and less practice to use than 
others, but the trade-off is that with less work 
comes less range. If you pick up a throwing stick, 
you can hunt immediately but with little range. If 
you take the time to make an eff ective hunting 
bow and the arrows to go with it and spend more 
time practicing, you can hunt a wide variety of 
game at greater distances.

R ABBIT STICK

Th e “rabbit stick,” quite simply, is a club specifi -
cally for throwing. It is the easiest of hunting tools 
to acquire and can be very eff ective with a bit of 
practice. Any solid stick or a weight that can be 
easily thrown and that measures from your arm-
pit to your wrist will suffi ce.
 Th is measurement is a general rule. Just take 
into consideration that the shorter the stick, the 
faster you can throw it but the more accurate 
you must be. A larger stick allows for poorer aim 
but cannot be thrown as fast. Experiment and 

157

weigh the trade-off s to fi nd what works best for 
you.
 Th e basic rabbit stick is about two inches in 
diameter and has all of its edges rounded. Th is 
helps cut down on sound as the stick fl ies through 
the air and gives less warning to your prey. Th ese 
modifi cations take little time by using a knife or 
by abrading the stick on a rough stone. A large, 
stationary rock works better than a small, mov-
able one.
 A whole host of modifi cations can be made to 
improve the performance of the rabbit stick. Th e 
weighted rabbit stick is much like the basic rabbit 
stick except that one end is bulbous. When it is 

Rabbit sticks

15 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

thrown, the stick spins; the bulbous end spins 
more slowly and acts like a hub, while the handle 
is like a spoke. Th e result is that the end of the 
handle spins more rapidly than other parts of the 
stick, making it capable of delivering a devastat-
ing blow to the target. Th is weapon is good for 
short distances in fairly open sections of woods 
and meadows, as well as in tall grass.
 Once you have modifi ed your rabbit stick by 
carving or abrading it, it is important to camou-
fl age the carve marks to make it harder for the ani-
mal to pick up the stick’s movement as it 
approaches. Camoufl age of wooden tools can be 
done by fi re hardening, which will also increase 
the life span of your weapon. The best way to 
accomplish this, especially in the case of a spear or 
arrows, is by thrusting them into the sand near, but 
not in, the fi re. If the tool is too close, the wood will 
burn; if it is too far from the fi re, nothing will hap-
pen. You want the moisture to be driven out and 
the wood to be lightly browned. Smooth wood 
tends to become shiny as a result of this process, so 
you may want to scuff up such areas to aid in cam-
oufl age. In the absence of sand, the wood can be 
held over the fi re or just next to it, but you must 
closely monitor and rotate it almost constantly or 
you may char and weaken the weapon.

The Boomerang—a Modified 
Rabbit Stick

Th e boomerang, one of my favorite weapons, has 
a natural curve in it and is carved so that a cross 
section is elliptical or winglike (one-half of an 
ellipse). Th is weapon does not return, as is com-
monly thought, but fl ies faster and more silently, 
as well as farther and fl atter, than any other rabbit 
stick I have ever used. (Most objects move in an 

Boomerang

arc when they are thrown, but due to the aerody-
namics of the boomerang, the arc is almost non-
existent.) Th e best terrain for the boomerang is an 
open fi eld; use the sidearm throw for short or lon-
ger distances, as described below.

Throwing the Rabbit Stick

Th rows can be made overhand, from a sidearm 
position, and anywhere in between. A sidearm 
throw works well with the boomerang in open 
meadows or other areas where there is enough 
space between trees to allow for unhindered 
flight. Overhand throws work well in taller 
growth or areas in which there is little distance 
between trees.
 Th e tricky part is preparing to release your 
weapon. You cannot stalk your quarry and then, 
when you are in range, rear back and prepare to 
hurl your weapon—you will give yourself away. 
Instead, you must slowly position your body and 
throwing stick into launch position as you stalk.
For overhand throws, use your whole body. 
Don’t try to “muscle it” with just your arm. Slowly 

 
 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

159

Throwing the rabbit stick overhand

Throwing the rabbit stick from a sidearm 

bring your stick and throwing arm back over your 
shoulder, and bend backward from your waist. 
Your body, now taut as a bow, is ready to contract, 
starting with your stomach muscles and ending 
with your arm and hand snapping forward like 
the cracking of a whip, hurling the weapon for-
ward at your prey.
 Using the sidearm throw is similar in that you 
use your whole body to launch the stick. How-
ever, instead of bending backward, place your 
stick behind your neck and twist to the right until 
your left hand and shoulder are pointing at your 
target (opposite if you’re left -handed). Th en, in a 
single motion, whip your body around, releasing 
the stick as your throwing hand comes to bear on 
the target. Be wary of nearby trees and low 
branches.

position

THRUSTING SPEAR

Th e thrusting spear is designed to thrust directly 
into an animal without leaving the hunter’s 
hands. Some animals, like rabbits and other small 
game, are struck from above; therefore, the spear 
must be able to withstand the force of being 
driven severely into the ground.

I prefer a stout sapling about fi ve feet long for 
the shaft of the thrusting spear. It doesn’t need to 
be straight, and the thin end should be sharpened 
and fi re hardened. I do not recommend using 
bone spearheads for small game, because you will 
likely stab through the animal and into the 
ground, breaking the tip that took such eff ort to 

 
 
16 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

create. For large game, a bone spearhead can be 
affi xed to the shaft , as described below.

THROWING SPEAR

Th e throwing spear is used for hunting animals at 
distances up to approximately fi ft een feet.
 Harvest a straight sapling that is about six feet 
in length with a diameter less than one and one-
half inches. Sharpen the thicker of the two ends 
and fi re harden the tip.

Bone spearheads should be as wide as or wider 
than the shaft of the spear or arrow on which they 
are mounted. I use leg bones from deer, elk, or 
other large animals for spear tips. Smashing the 
bone leaves many shards of usable size, which can 
be carved or abraded into the desired shape. Make 
the tang (the part of the spearhead that is con-
nected to the shaft ) as long as or longer than the 
tip, and fl are it at the bottom. Bone can be made 
only so sharp; it is not a hard enough substance to 
create a razor-sharp edge. However, serrating the 
edge increases its ability to cut and takes little 
time with a good abrading stone.

Spear points

 A shaft ready for hafting

 To insert a bone spearhead, wrap strong 
 cordage around the shaft eight inches from the 
pointed tip. Split the tip down to the cordage. 
Insert the spearhead tang, and pack around it 
with pitch and ash (see “Working with Pitch” in 
Chapter 16). Bind the head tightly with wet raw-
hide or sinew and let it dry. Once the hide has 
dried, slather the lashings with pitch and ash. To 
make a really solid seat for the spearhead, the 
inside of the split in the upper end of the spear 
shaft can be carved down to better accommodate 
the thickness of the tang.
 To throw a spear, fi rst fi nd the point in the 
middle of the shaft where the spear will balance if 
it is placed across an outstretched fi nger. Mark 
the balance point with charcoal, and set the spear 
in your hand with the mark in the center of your 
palm. Close your fi ngers around it, and raise it 
over your shoulder as if you are preparing to 
throw. Note where the tip of your index fi nger 
touches the spear, and carve a shallow groove all 
the way around the shaft . Every time you pick up 
your spear, your fingertip should be in that 
groove.
 The mechanics of throwing properly are 
worth learning, even if the fi rst few times you 
throw you feel awkward.

 
 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

161

1. Start with a target about fi ft een feet away 
and, if you are using a bone spearhead, be 
sure that your target and the area around 
it are soft .

2. Face your target with your left arm out in 
front, pointing at it (opposite stance for 
left ies).

3. Extend your right arm with the spear 
straight back; the spearhead should be 
near your ear.

4. Shift your weight to your right foot as you 
lean back, and use your left foot as a 
counterbalance.

5. Keeping your eye on the target, begin 
moving the spear forward. As your hand 
moves toward the target, your elbow will 
move forward, too. During this move-
ment, your elbow should point at the tar-
get and pass your shoulder before it passes 
your hand. Run through this step slowly a 
few times to be sure that you have the 
motion correct before you attempt a 
throw.

6. As you release, follow through, with the 
tip of your index fi nger and the groove 
being the last points of contact with the 
spear. Your throw should end with your 
fi nger pointing at the target.

BOLAS

Th e function of bolas is to hold prey long enough 
to allow the hunter to approach and kill it with a 
thrusting spear or club. Primary bola game are 
large birds, such as turkeys and geese, as well as 
long-legged animals like deer.

Bolas

 Three to seven weights of stone, wood, or 
leather pouches fi lled with sand are connected to 
a loop of cordage by equal lengths (about three 
feet) of the same material. When thrown, the 
weights fan out until one or more of the pieces of 
cordage hits an object, which allows the weights 
to continue to swing forward and wrap around 
the wings or legs of your target. Th is tangles and 
oft en temporarily stops any forward motion of 
the prey.
 Contrary to popular belief, bolas are not 
swung multiple times around your head prior to 
your releasing them. Th is would only alert your 
prey. A more eff ective way is to start with your 
right index and middle fi ngers in the loop at about 
shoulder height. Meanwhile, your left hand pro-
vides tension on the cordage when you lace your 
fi ngers through the cordage and rest them on the 
weights, preventing any tangling. When you are 
in position to throw, release the bola with your 
left hand while simultaneously whipping your 
right hand up and around your head once and 
following through until your right hand is point-
ing at your target.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

As seen from above

Target

As seen from the side

Direction of travel

Bola throwing sequence

ATLATL

Th e atlatl (AHT-lah-tuhl) intrigues many people 
and is defi nitely addictive once you have one at 
your disposal. Th e popularity of this impressive 
lesson in mechanical advantage is increasing, so 
much so that a few states now allow the use of the 
atlatl for taking deer.
 An atlatl, in the simplest terms, is typically a 
rigid to fl exible board or branch that is fi ft een to 
thirty inches in length. It has a handle at one end 
and a projection, hook, or spur to hold and then 
propel the spearlike projectile or dart, at the other 
end. Th e length of the atlatl increases the mechan-
ical advantage of the hunter’s forward arm 
motion. Th e energy from the atlatl comes fi rst 

from the hunter’s arm and the forward motion of 
the arm, which (in fl exible models) causes the 
atlatl itself to fl ex back initially before springing 
forward. Th is compresses the dart (again, in fl ex-
ible models) and therefore bends it somewhat. Th e 
dart then snaps back to a straight position and 
moves quickly toward its target. Overly fl exible 
darts, when springing back from being com-
pressed, go past straight and bend the other way, 
doing the reverse. Th is wastes a lot of energy as 
the dart fl ops around, and the results may be 
poorer than with a stiff er dart.
 Th e dart is a rigid to fl exible shaft from about 
four feet to eight feet in length. Fletching is 
attached to the aft end, on which there is an 
indentation to receive the projection or hook of 

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

16 3

the atlatl. A point of stone, bone, or wood is used 
in the same manner as arrows for taking game.

Making the Atlatl

Th e atlatl can be from just about any wood with 
strength to it. I prefer ash, although I’ve used 
maple, dogwood, oak, and elder, among others. 
(Th e elder seemed brittle compared to the harder 
woods but worked satisfactorily.) For the fi nger 
loops on the handle, I prefer a fl exible material 
like leather, which is lashed to the atlatl with 
cordage.
 Opinions diff er as to the purpose of banner 
stones or counterweights. Some suggest that ban-
ner stones make it easier to hold the atlatl in the 
ready position for longer periods of time. Others 
suggest that the stones add energy to the dart 
when it is thrown. I do not use them so will not 
weigh in on the discussion.
 Th e weapon described here is for close-range 
(fi ft y feet or less) hunting of deer-size game.

Some saplings or branches have grown in such 
a way that their branch placement sets them up to 
be a great atlatl. Straight-grained woods that are 
one and one-half inches in diameter are easily 
split in half, and a branch nub can be quickly con-
verted to a spur. I always try for a fl ex or spine in 
my atlatl that compliments the dart or spear. If 
the atlatl has too little spine, it can break under 
the pressure of the launch. Optimally, the atlatl 
bends as the throwing hand moves the handle 
forward and the inertia of the spear slows down 
the other end. At a certain point, the spur end 
begins to catch up with the handle, and the fl exed 
atlatl snaps forward, not only with the arm and 
wrist action of the thrower but also with the 
spring action of a just-fi red bow. If the atlatl is too 
stiff , you sacrifi ce that snap. Th ere are applica-

Atlatl preharvest in tree

Atlatl tips 

 
 
16 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Basket-maker tip

With careful carving, all that is left is a fl ute end-
ing at what is known as a fl uted or basket-maker 
spur.

Making the Dart

Th e dart is a projectile commonly made of river 
cane or bamboo, although I also use carefully 
selected birch, maple, ash, and pine saplings gen-
erally from four to eight feet in length. Th e dart 
should be fl exible, but if it is too fl exible, it will 
break as it snaps under compression on the 
launch. If it is too stiff , you will not be terribly 
impressed with the distance. Th e fl etching can be 
made of feathers, cloth, or leather, and the tip can 
made from bone, stone, or wood.

1. Th e dart or spear is harvested green and 
as straight as you can possibly fi nd. I look 
for saplings that, if they are bent, have 
short, subtle bends, as they are easier to 
straighten.

2. Remove the bark. Th is is easiest when the 
wood is green, but the downside is that 
there is the potential for splits to develop, 
because the newly stripped shaft shrinks 

Atlatl handle pattern

tions for the rigid atlatl, primarily for very close-
quarter hunting where the ability to loft the dart a 
great distance is exchanged for being able to 
deliver a heavier spear to a target with extreme 
force. Th e bulk of my fi rst atlatls were of this type 
due to my ignorance regarding the mechanics 
and never attempting a thin-enough dart shaft .
 Th e spur can be fashioned in a number of 
ways in addition to that mentioned above. A for-
eign spur consists of a piece of material—oft en 
stone, bone, or antler—that is attached with a 
sinew or rawhide lashing. Alternately, the atlatl 
can be carved fl at, and, instead of a spur being 
attached, a fl ute or channel is cut into the wood to 
excavate an area in front of the spur location. 

 
 
 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

16 5

unevenly if it dries rapidly. If time allows, 
leave the bark on for a few weeks prior to 
skinning the sapling.

3. Straighten the shaft by heating it over a 
fi re, then removing it from the heat and 
bending it to just beyond the desired posi-
tion. Hold it there until it is cool and move 
on to next bend.

4. Bore out a depression on the butt (thin 

end) to receive the spur tip.

5. Fletch as you would an arrow (see the 
“Arrows” section, later in this chapter), or 
simply attach two feathers on opposite 
sides of the shaft .

6. Fire harden the points, or haft the stone or 
bone tips as you would for arrows. I rec-
ommend lashing the shaft three or so 
inches aft of the tip, especially if you use 
wooden points or use the darts for target 
practice; this will limit the distance the 
splits can travel.

7. Depending on humidity, you may have to 
do a quick straightening prior to use, so 
check your gear before heading out.

Throwing with the Atlatl

Although a handle is not essential, it will allow 
you to throw much farther. I use a leather strap 
for the split-fi nger grip, in which the index fi nger 
passes through one loop and the middle fi nger 
passes through the other. Gripping the atlatl and 
dart with your fi ngertips while both are over your 
shoulder and parallel to the ground puts you in 
the ready position.
 To begin the throw, drop your elbow. As your 
hand comes forward, let go of the atlatl, keeping 
your fi ngers in the loops only. Due to the fl exibil-
ity of the loops, the spur end whips around aft er 

Power or split-ﬁ nger grip

the hand has stopped moving and provides 
incredible follow-through. If distance is your goal, 
start with your arm pointing at the ground 
behind you and the dart pointing up at a sixty-
fi ve-degree angle. Run a few steps and launch the 
dart, but release it early so that it soars up at that 
same starting angle or a little less. Your results 
should be impressive. Th e accuracy of the split-
fi nger grip is due at least in part to the naturally 
straight follow-through it produces.
 Another throwing method is the hammer 
grip, wherein the atlatl is gripped like a hammer 
with the thumb through one loop and the index 
fi nger in the other. It is not diffi cult to do, yet the 
ease with which your follow-through can shift 
from the middle to one side requires a bit of prac-
tice and consciousness when you are throwing. In 
all honesty, I do not fi nd one throw to be signifi -
cantly harder than the other; both require prac-
tice, and undoubtedly you will develop a 
preference.

Hammer grip

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Throwing the atlatl

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

167

 
16 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

FIELD BOW

A few hours can suffi ce to make a bow and arrows 
of serviceable quality, with a few days set aside to 
allow the bow stave to dry somewhat. But this 
begs the question, Where does archery and the 
manufacture of its requisite tools fall in a survival 
situation? Th e short answer is that they don’t. In 
the time required to make all of the necessities, 
learn to shoot and stalk game, and actually take 
it, the unintentional survivor will either be res-
cued or no longer be a survivor. For the primitive 
technologist or long-term wilderness sojourner, 
however, bows with a range of about fi ft een feet 
can be made in little time and can augment your 
hunting options. Although it should not be your 
fi rst choice, once you are able to fi ll your belly 
with other means, the bow and arrow is a fi ne 
addition.
 Th e fi eld bow requires one fairly straight sap-
ling or branch that is about four and a half feet 
long and an inch and a half in diameter in the 
middle. Many a stave that I have harvested 
straight has taken a back-set or bend within a 
short time. In such cases, I usually hold the stave 
so that it curves away from me, creating a natu-
rally recurved bow stave.
 Roughing out is simply removing the bulk of 
the extra wood from the stave, most of which is 
on the thicker end of (or base of) the limb. Wood 
is only removed from the belly of the bow (i.e., the 
side facing the shooter when the bow is drawn), 
and the handle is left thick enough to provide a 
good grip.
 Th e bow tips must be nocked to accommodate 
the bowstring. A rounded groove can be abraded 
on an angle at either side of the tip, but care must 
be taken to ensure that the remaining wood 
between the grooves is suffi cient to hold under 

Belly

Back

A bow strung and drawn

full draw. How thin it can actually be depends on 
the width of the tip, as well as on the thickness 
and the type of wood used. If your tip is one and 
one-fourth inches wide by one-fourth inch tall, 
and you leave three-fourths inch between the 
grooves, you would be hard-pressed to break the 
tip of any wood.
 Alternately, the tip of the bow can tapered, 
either sharply enough so that it creates a shoulder 
for the string to sit on, or more gradually, so that 
the loop at the end of the string cannot slide down 
beyond a desired point. Th is, of course, requires 
that the loop be small enough to keep it where it is 
wanted.
 Optimally, the limbs of the bow will be 
matched in strength, and the curve described by 

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

169

A hinge with the desired balance curve behind it

A bow tip without string and a bow tip with 

string on a strung bow

the drawn bow will be even and without hinges 
(sharp bends) or straight spots. Such a bow will be 
far more effi cient than one that has either of the 
two problems just mentioned.
 A hinge occurs at a point that is weaker than 
the wood on either side. When the bow is drawn, 
most, if not all, of the fl ex is concentrated at this 
point, which quickly becomes overstressed and 
renders the bow useless. A straight spot is a sec-
tion where the limb is thicker than the surround-
ing wood, resulting in a section that fails to bend 
with the rest of the limb during the draw. Unbent 
wood lends no power to the arrow, and hinges 
may develop on either end of a straight spot if the 
limb is overstressed.
 Tillering is the process by which the fl ex or 
curve of the limbs is assessed and adjusted to 
make it smooth and even. With practice, the bow-
yer will notice hinges and straight spots, and til-
lering can oft en correct these problems. Tillering 

A straight spot bracketed by two hinges

can also be applied to reduce the overall stiff ness 
or draw weight of a bow stave, making it easier 
and more comfortable to draw and shoot 
(although reducing the force behind the arrow in 
the process). Below are three tillering methods, 
the fi rst two being practical in the fi eld.

Floor tillering is done one limb at a time by 
looking down the curve of the lower limb while 
the tip is pressed against the ground with enough 
force to cause it to bend.
 A tillering stick is a straight section of sapling 
about thirty inches in length, with either branch 

 
 
170 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Tillering stick clean and in use

better view the curve of the bow to look for hinges, 
straight spots, and evenness of curve between the 
limbs.
 Th e tillering board is a rather deluxe tool that 
is impractical in the wilderness, but it can be built 
and used at home in between wilderness journeys 
if you plan to use a well-built, primitive-style bow 
in the wild. A four-by-eight-foot sheet of plywood 
is painted white, and a precise grid is drawn on it. 
Th e size of the grid squares is up to you, although 
I use ones that are four inches wide and two 
inches high. A bow rest is placed at one end of the 
centerline, and a small pulley is placed at the other 
end of the centerline. The bow-in-progress is 
loosely strung, and its handhold is placed on the 
bow rest. A strong string with a small hook on 
one end is hooked to the center of the bow string, 
and the other end is run through the pulley. Th e 
tillering board is anchored fi rmly to some solid 
object. Th e bowyer can then stand back and pull 
on the end of the string, drawing the bow. Com-
pare how the opposite tips of the stave line up 
against the grid, and look at several intermediate 
places on both limbs as well. Seeing the bow in 

Floor tillering

nubs or notches in one side. Th e base of the stick 
is placed on the center of the handle of the bow, 
which is strung so loosely that the string is limp. 
With the bow on the ground, the string is drawn 
upward until some curve is evident in the bow. 
Th e string is then hung on one of the notches or 
branch nubs, and the bowyer can step back to 

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

171

Tillering board

Accommodating a Hinge

When a hinge is developing, wood can be 

removed from either side to match up the wood’s 

resistance to ﬂ exing with that of the hinge. If the 

hinge has been overbent (overstressed), or the 

hinge area is too thin, then you can complete the 

bow, but it may have a six-pound draw weight—

not helpful unless you’re raiding the Cub Scouts 

of their marshmallows. I built a beautiful ﬂ at bow, 

sixty-eight inches in length, that developed a 

hinge on both limbs, each about six inches from 

the tips. Although I was loath to cut the bow down 

to ﬁ fty-six inches, it was the only way to end up 

with a nicely functioning bow.

action illustrates how it needs to be tillered. It 
may draw well for the fi rst ten inches, and then 
a hinge or straight spot may show up rather 
abruptly.
 Th e tillering process is completed by remov-
ing wood in small quantities, then checking the 
bow again and repeating the process as necessary. 
It is not advisable to let the bow sit in a drawn 
position on the tillering stick or board, as it will 
likely take a set, or permanent bend.
 Here are step-by-step directions for making a 
bow:

1. A stave is selected and cut.
2. The stave is roughed out, defining the 
shape the bow will take, and enough wood 
is removed to allow the limbs to be only 

 
 
 
17 2 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

slightly bent. At no time during construc-
tion is the bow fully drawn except at the 
very end!

3. Th e bow is set aside for about three to fi ve 
days in a dry location. I have had no prob-
lem putting them in the sun, although 
direct desert sun might cause some exces-
sive checking (cracking as the wood 
shrinks unevenly when it dries). Remem-
ber, a midsummer- or winter-harvested 
stave will have less moisture in it (sap runs 
in the spring and the fall, if to a lesser 
extent), and this can reduce the level of 
checking.

4. After partial drying, more wood is 
removed, fi rst from one limb and then 
from the other. Each limb is frequently 
fl oor tillered so that you can assess it and 
fi nd trouble spots.

5. Th e tips need to be set up to hold a string. I 
like to cut or abrade a groove on the sides, 
below the tip, going from the back of the 
bow to the belly at a slight angle toward 
the handle. Do not groove the bow’s back 
(the side facing your target)!
6. Make a string (see Chapter 15).
7. Stretch the string. Tie one end to a tree 
and the other to a stick, and pull with 
steady pressure. Or, alternatively, hang a 
weight from it and leave for a few hours or 
more.

8. Make a loop on one end of the string if you 
have not woven one in as you made the 
string, and then determine where to make 
the second loop, such that the string will 
be taut but the bow unfl exed when the 
bow is strung. Gently apply pressure to the 
string as you draw it back slowly. Watch 
for problem spots and address them as 

they arise. If you have a tillering stick, use 
it, but do not leave the bow fl exed more 
than necessary to determine areas that 
still need to be worked. Do not fully draw 
the bow at fi rst. Some hinges may not be 
evident until the bow nears full draw, as 
the areas most stressed shift within the 
limb.

9. Deal with each trouble spot as it appears. 
Ignoring these areas or hoping that they 
will go away is foolish, and as their num-
bers grow, so, too, will their chances of 
ruining your bow.

 10. If step 9 looks to be in order, tighten the 
string to hold the bow at a resting bend 
(strung, but not drawn). I usually like a 
minimum of eight inches from the handle 
to the string on bows that are sixty inches 
and greater, and less for shorter bows.
 11. Slowly draw the bow to increasing levels of 
draw. I have caused bows to develop a fi ne 
network of spiderweb-like compression 
cracks all over the belly by fully drawing 
them too soon. Some fi eld-expedient bows 
will not be big enough to allow a grown 
person to draw to his or her personal draw 
length (the archer may have a twenty-
nine-inch draw, yet the bow may have a 
maximum draw of fourteen inches), so 
watch the bow and let it tell you when to 
stop: usually it is the point just before the 
loud crack. Aft er making a few fi ne pieces 
of kindling, you will begin to understand 
the language of the bow.

 Understand that you will break bows. Anyone 
wanting to make bows is going to lose some; prob-
ably a lot at fi rst. If you pay attention to how the 
bow breaks, you will learn to deal with those 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems before they arise or when they are still 
in their infancy. I broke many a bow due to a lack 
of patience. I just wanted to be done one way or 
the other, and I was, with a fi nely worked piece of 
kindling. Take care with the fi nal stages and it 
will pay off .

ARROWS

A great deal of time and energy can be focused 
on arrows. Aft er all, an archer wants a quiver of 
arrows that will perform the same way. Making 
arrows the same in weight, length, and diameter, 
as well as matching the fl etching and points, is 
quite an undertaking, even with modern tools. 
The level of perfection required for effective 
bows and arrows increases with the distance to 
the target. In other words, making a bow and 
arrows capable of hitting a target at fi ft een feet is 
far easier than making a bow that can deliver 
arrows to a target one hundred yards away. 
Imperfections in the arrow, the bow, and the 
shooting can grow and become increasingly 
obvious with distance.

Harvesting

My preferred method for fashioning arrows is to 
use shoots or other straight-growing wood, rather 
than splitting out blanks and rounding them out 
with a cutting edge. Ash, maple, willow, high-
bush blueberry, arrowwood, birch, pine, river 
cane, oak, and dogwood are, among others, some 
of the woods suited to the life of an arrow. 
Although I have no experience with Sitka spruce, 
John Massy speaks highly of it in Th e Traditional 
Bowyers Bible. 

HUNTING WE AP ONS 

17 3

 Harvest the straightest green shaft s you can 
fi nd. Look around the edges of water and woods, 
as well as in clearings, which also provide good 
pickings as new growth stretches for the light. 
Harvest shaft s that are about one-half inch at the 
thick end and a good six to eight inches longer 
than the desired fi nished length. Th e fi rst shaft s I 
harvested were blueberry, and they were better 
suited to atlatl darts or throwing spears due to 
their heft and thickness. A midwinter or mid-
summer harvest yields shaft s with much less sap 
in them, resulting in less checking. Th e more you 
look for shaft s, the better you will become at fi nd-
ing those that need little work.

Drying

Loosely bundle ten or more shaft s together, and 
set them in a cool, dry place out of the sun. If time 
is not an issue, they can be left for a few weeks 
before you scrape off the bark with a sharp edge, 
then return them to the bundle for more drying. 
If time is of the essence, you may need to force 
dry them—a tricky and oft en costly endeavor. For 
a hasty shaft , harvest and debark the shaft all at 
once. Th en cover the cut ends with wet clay, and 
stand them upright or hang them. Aft er a day or 
two of dry weather, they are well on their way to 
being ready for the next step. Many an experi-
enced bowyer is cringing at this point, because 
this goes against all of the rules in the bowyer’s 
art. Some arrows will develop wide cracks run-
ning down their length (shakes) and ought to be 
discarded, but others will be fi ne. (I have not 
studied the performance of using shafts with 
shakes, but I have used some with narrow cracks 
as target arrows with no real perceivable diff er-
ence. More study needs to be done to determine 
how much more prone such shaft s are to breakage 

 
ments, the bow in the arrow will return to some 
degree and will require another straightening.
 An arrow wrench can be made with a piece of 
wood or bone in two ways. First, and more com-
monly, is the hole-in-a-stick or bone type. Simply 
make a hole slightly larger than the diameter of 
the arrow’s largest diameter, round the hole edges 
to reduce denting, and slide the arrow through 
the hole to just above or below the bend. Th e sec-
ond is the F type of wrench, being no more than a 
section of sapling in which a capital F can be seen. 
Th is is cut and applied by holding the base of the 
F parallel to the arrow while one of the arms of 
the F passes above the shaft and the other passes 
below the shaft . By turning the handle down or 
up, pressure is applied to the shaft . Th e wrench 

174 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

or other problems.) I have also debarked shaft s, 
bundled them, and set them in tree branches off 
the ground for a few days with mixed results. Th e 
loss has typically been about 50 percent but has 
varied about 25 to 75 percent from one batch to 
another.

Straightening

Depending on the bowyer, straightening is done 
anytime from directly upon harvest of the shaft 
to aft er it has dried. I straighten aft er a few days of 
drying and then do a fi ne tuning before fi nishing 
the arrow. Shaft s with a signifi cant bend or bow 
to them, if they must be used, do well with an ini-
tial straightening upon harvest and then a fi nal 
session before the arrow is fi nished. River cane is 
well suited to this technique, as the bends occur 
in the nodes, or joints, of the plant. Th ese dry 
hard and can make straightening very tough if 
not altogether impossible.
 Heat the whole bent area without scorching it. 
Bend the shaft so that it bends slightly opposite 
the original bend (bend it straight and then a little 
more), and remove it from the heat. Hold it until 
it is cool. Aft er time, especially in damp environ-

Curved shaft with overlay of corrective bend

Arrow wrench in use

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

175

provides more leverage for stubborn bends and 
helps in forming a fi ne arrow.

Arrowheads

Although there are many heads, or points, that 
you can put on your arrows, one of the following 
three should meet your needs.

• 

• 

Th e fi eld point is the most simple of the three 
and is made merely by carving or abrading 
the thick end of the shaft into a rounded point. 
Th is point should be fi re hardened prior to 
straightening, or you may need to tweak the 
shaft aft erwards. Th is point is good for smaller 
game but does not usually cause as much 
damage as the broad head. If you have a shaft 
with a pithy core, the point should be off - 
center, as this allows you to actually make a 
point with the surrounding wood.
Th e blunt is used for stunning small game and 
may need to be followed up with a speedy, 
killing blow from a rabbit stick or other 
weapon. Th e value of such a point is that it sel-
dom needs replacing (at least in comparison 
with other points), it can take a beating when 

• 

you are hunting game on the ground (where 
hitting rocks is likely), and, as with the others, 
it works well in the hands of a good archer.
 Th ere are two ways of making blunts with 
which I am familiar. One is to harvest a shaft 
from a tree like the ash, with the tip being 
from the joint of two branches. Th is provides 
the material from which the blunt can be 
carved. Th e other way is to make a separate 
blunt that is then attached to the shaft , as out-
lined below.
Th e broad-head arrow tip can do more dam-
age than the other two tips mentioned above, 
because the breadth of the cutting edges lacer-
ates fl esh, blood vessels, and organs; it also 
leaves a larger opening from which blood can 
drain. Th ese tips are oft en thought of as beau-
tiful, glittering pieces of fi nely craft ed obsid-
ian, or the more modern, razor-bladed, 
titanium-tipped arrowhead. I used to lament 
my lack of skill in the realm of fl int knapping 
and so experimented with other materials for 
these mythic points of long ago. Bone and 
wood, both of which are available more oft en 
than chert or obsidian, can be carved or 
abraded into good projectile points. Hard-

Three types of points—two blunts, a ﬁ eld point, and a broad head

 
176 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

woods can be fi re hardened and polished to a 
glassy fi nish with a smooth stone or piece of 
bone. I add grooves for a serrated edge on 
both materials. A common error made by the 
novice is in the size. My fi rst arrowheads were 
better suited to spears or atlatl darts. Remem-
ber, the purpose of the arrowhead or tip is to 
provide access through the hide and fl esh to 
the vital organs. Given the diameter of an 
arrow shaft , the width of the broad head does 
not need to be much larger. If you have the 
means of delivering a larger tip to the target, 
by all means, go for it, because it will have a 
greater chance of causing a mortal wound by 
striking an organ and/or severing a blood ves-
sel. But it will also have a greater chance of 
hitting bone.

 A number of materials are suitable for mak-
ing points or arrowheads. The gold standard 
seems to be obsidian, the sharpest natural cutting 
edge known to man, yet it has its drawbacks: it is 
not widely distributed over North America; it 
takes much practice, some specific tools, and 
guidance in order to produce a good arrowhead; 
and it does not survive impact well, if at all. Other 
options include:

• 

Wood
. Hardwoods are easily shaped when 
they are green if a cutting or abrading tool is 
available. If not, a combination of shattering, 
crushing, and splitting using found stone 
wedges should provide you with some usable 
pieces that can be abraded on a rough stone to 
the desired design. I prefer a shortened ver-
sion of the Clovis-type point, because it stands 
up better to impact than points with notches 
(notches create break points). Wood tips need 
to be carefully fi re hardened, and adding some 

A Clovis point 

grooves as a simple serration is not a bad idea 
either. Burnishing with bone or a smooth 
stone gives the head a very smooth surface. 
Th e downside is that, at this point, I have yet 
to be convinced of the value of a wooden 
arrowhead. Th e inability of the wooden edge 
to cut through hair and hide (especially in 
winter) is a major concern. In tests I have con-
ducted, the arrow bounced or broke without 
penetrating beyond the hide. Such small 
wounds in a deer or deer-sized animal would 
do nothing to aid the hunter. For small game, 
like rabbits and squirrels, an arrow that is 
sharpened and fi re hardened in a simple point 

A bone point

 
HUNTING WE AP ONS 

17 7

• 

• 

is suffi cient, and no time needs to be wasted 
on fancy-looking heads.
. While bone is harder to work than 
Bone
wood, it stands up fairly well to impact pro-
vided it is not with stone. Th e points are not as 
fragile as wood but take longer to make. I like 
to add serrations to these, too.
Pottery
. My experience with pottery arrow 
points is somewhat experimental, but my ini-
tial impressions are fairly positive. As with 
wood, the Clovis-type points or a stunted ver-
sion seem like the most sturdy, and the impor-
tance of getting the highest temperature 
possible in the fi ring process cannot be under-
stated. (See “Primitive Pottery” in Chapter 17.) 
Th e upside is that a mold or form can be made 
(also from clay), which will allow you to make 
many identical points. In addition, firing 
points is far less tricky than fi ring pots. I ran 

an experiment by fi ring two batches of arrow-
heads. One fi ring was not very hot, and the 
points, while sharp, were not hard and were 
very fragile. The second firing, at a much 
higher temperature, produced some nice 
points that penetrated deer to a depth of six 
inches in the chest and three inches in the 
thigh. Th e points broke at some point aft er 
entry, but they produced lethal wounds 
nonetheless.

Prepping the arrow shaft to receive a point is 
done by abrading or cutting a slot in the thick end 
of the shaft . Th is process is easiest when done 
from either side. It is also a good idea to wrap a bit 
of sinew below the bottom of the intended slot to 
prevent splitting the shaft . Tapering the last half 
inch of the shaft will also ease entry into the tar-
get for deeper penetration.

Detail of hafted point showing tapered shaft end

If the arrowhead has a base that is wider than 
the arrow shaft , sinew lashing is wrapped around 
the shaft from the top of the head’s stem down-
ward to just below the bottom of the stem. Th is 
prevents the head from moving. Pitch and ash, or 
glue, is applied, for both waterproofi ng and for its 
adhesive quality.

Clay points and a mold

 
 
 
178 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

fl etching can be very crude, if it is even there at 
all. I have used pine needles, split turkey feathers, 
and songbird feathers lashed with sinew on two 
sides of the shaft . I use the following method to 
attach fl etching.

1. If you are using a turkey tail feather or 
another large, fairly straight feather, split 
it with a stone fl ake or knife. If you only 
want two fletches or flights, take both 
from the same side of the same feather. 
(The natural curve of the feather will 
encourage the arrow to rotate one way; if 
you use opposite sides of the same feather, 
both fl etches will counteract each other, 
resulting in a less stable flight.) They 
should be about four inches long, although 
I have seen museum specimens that 
ranged from three inches to more than 
seven inches. If you want two smaller 
songbird feathers, use two that are of simi-
lar size and bend.

2. Trim the feathers with a sharp cutting 
edge so that they are equal in all dimen-
sions. Clean the quill at the top and at the 
bottom of the fl ight.

Three examples of hafting

If the head has no stem, add a groove or two 
on the lower portion of the cutting edges. Place 
the point in the slot at the tip of the shaft , and 
wrap sinew lashings around both the shaft and 
the grooves in the point.

Fletching

Fletching (also known as fl ights) is attached to the 
tail end of the arrow just below the nock to aid in 
keeping the arrow on target once it is loosed. 
Feathers, of course, are the most common mate-
rial. For the short-distance hunting I prefer, the 

Fletching with needles, songbird feathers, and turkey feathers

 
 
 
 
3. With a piece of wet sinew, make a wrap 
around the shaft at least one inch from the 
nock.

4. Place the thin end of the fi rst fl ight on the 
sinew, and continue the wrap. Going over 
the tip of the fl ight, add the second fl ight 
opposite the fi rst, and continue to wrap a 
few turns around the shaft . Once the top 
has been wrapped a few times and tied off , 
let it dry for an hour or so.

5. With the top sinew dry, you can now pull 
the fl ights downward so as to prevent any 
bowing in them. Th en, lash the bottoms as 
you did the tops. Longer fl ights may need 
an additional sinew wrap at their mid-
points or some pitch glue underneath the 
split midrib. I don’t shoot enough arrows 
with glued fl etching to be aware of any 
real advantage or disadvantage. Th e wet 
sinew is fl at and adheres to itself, requir-
ing no additional glue or knots to secure 
as long as it is kept dry. Any additional 
drag it may create is negligible.

The Nock

Th e nock is the wood with the slot into which the 
bow string is placed. Th e incredible amount of 
force exerted on the wood at the base of the nock 
slot can split poorly craft ed, partially split, thin 
arrows. Th e nock can be part of the actual arrow, 
or it can be a separate piece of harder material 
that is glued or attached with sinew to the shaft . A 
commercially produced nock holds the string 
(you can let go of the arrow once it is on the string 
and it will remain there). Making such a nock 
with a knife or primitive tools can be time con-
suming and tricky. I score the sides of the shaft 

HUNTING WE AP ONS 

179

where I want the nock and then gently bore a hole 
with my knife tip or stone fl ake. I then split out 
the wood from both sides until the nock is clear 
all the way through. Be careful not to split the 
shaft all the way through and damage it. More 
oft en than not, I’ll make very shallow nocks that 
are incapable of holding the bow string. With 
this, I have learned that I need a depth of at least 
one-eighth inch.

Two types of nocks

Fish Arrows

An extra-long arrow sans ﬂ etching serves well for 

hunting ﬁ sh or frogs. Contrary to popular belief, it 

is seldom necessary to have a string tied to your 

ﬁ sh arrow when you are hunting ﬁ sh that are less 

than about eight pounds. The arrow creates a sig-

niﬁ cant amount of drag and, given that it will 

never be exactly halfway through the ﬁ sh, there 

will be more drag on one side than on the other. 

This will cause the ﬁ sh to swim in circles, with one 

end of the arrow rising up out of the water and 

providing an easy handle.

 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 3

HUNTING METHODS

Hunting embodies diff erent things for diff erent 

people. In the past seventy-fi ve years, however, it 
has become a luxury for many more people than 
in earlier times—something done for sport and 
trophies rather than for subsistence. Many hunt-
ers, including myself, would rather hunt for their 
meat than cough up the money needed to pur-
chase a comparable amount of quality, additive-
free meat. Without getting on my soapbox to 
preach the merits or evils of hunting, I will say 
that, in wilderness survival, outside of a few tropi-
cal climates and especially in the cold seasons, the 
consumption of meat is necessary in order to 
maintain health. Vegetarianism is a modern lux-
ury born of rapid, refrigerated transportation. 
Trying to live off the land, eating locally grown 
foods, and preserving them without the benefi t of 
pressure canners and freezers are challenges, and 
if meat is removed from the menu . . . well, try to 
plan out a year’s worth of meals using only in-
season or dried local, native fl ora.
 Alright, so the soapbox came out.
 Most animals are edible and provide great 
nourishment. Th e trick is getting the animal to 
make the ultimate sacrifice in giving you its 
body.
 Hunters approach this challenge from diff er-
ent perspectives. Some simply think mechani-

cally: the game must eat and drink; therefore, I 
will wait near a feeding area that I believe it will 
visit. Th is approach might work in a few hours, or 
it could take days or weeks. Spending some time 
watching your intended quarry will increase your 
understanding of its habits and thus your chances 
of locating it at a given time. At some point, most 
hunters seem to adopt certain philosophies about 
the taking of game. Some traditional native hunt-
ers may fast for a time prior to the hunt or ritually 
purify themselves (as in a sweat lodge), not only to 
reduce or eliminate scent but also to cleanse the 
mind and spirit. I used to make a fi re with a bow 
and drill to lightly smoke myself, my clothes, and 
my weapons. I have hung my hunting attire in 
trees through rainstorms, left it submerged in 
rapids in rivers, washed it without detergent, and 
eaten only bland foods for days prior to the hunt, 
among other things.

THE MENTAL GAME

Eventually, I came to realize that the environment 
dictates to what extremes you must go. In some 
places, a downwind deer can be shot from ten 
yards by a hunter puffi ng away on a cigarette, 

181

18 2 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

while in other places, like parts of Montana, Ari-
zona, and other wild areas, a faint hint of some-
thing “odd” or a glimpse of “diff erent” movement 
will send your quarry off in a heartbeat. As for the 
philosophy, well, you are trying to kill something, 
and regardless of your religious background, that 
ingredient in all living things that makes us alive 
and not an animated corpse is worthy of some 
level of honor. Learning to be humble in wilder-
ness survival is a lesson you will learn if you stay 
out long enough to provide for yourself in a sus-
tainable way. If you do not opt to follow the rules 
of the land, you will suff er. Th ose who “pit them-
selves against nature” are approaching the situa-
tion from a fi ghting stance, and if they survive 
long enough, they will be brought to heel. It is 
when we let go, when we quit fi ghting and gain a 
balance with the situation, that survival really 
becomes less of a struggle.
 Once, when I was about eighteen or nineteen, 
I was heading out to one of my primitive camps 
for a few weeks of focused practice on fi re making 
and stalking, when I learned some humbling les-
sons. With my head in the clouds and some 
“starter” groceries in a paper bag in my hand, I 
came upon a lone turkey. I fi rst saw her about fi f-
teen feet away and immediately cursed my crin-
kly bag and lack of a weapon. As I attempted to 
quietly set the bag down, I scanned the ground 
for projectiles of any sort and saw an oak branch 
of rabbit stick size within a step. Alas, when I 
picked it up, not only did the bird see me, but I 
realized that the stick was so rotten it would not 
survive the G forces exerted on it by a kid’s merry-
go-round, let alone a killing throw. I ran. Th e tur-
key was too close to take off (turkeys slow down 
when they are trying to get airborne in an attempt 
to get some distance away before taking fl ight). As 

I ran, looking at the bird under my outstretched 
hand, a thought entered my conscious mind from 
some small, dark, immature, and disappointingly 
stupid part of my brain: “What if it pecks me, or 
worse, scratches me?” I mentally grabbed myself 
by the throat and squeezed while off ering a few 
choice adjectives to describe my actions, and that 
was all it took—one millisecond of hesitation and 
she was gone. I immediately held my breath, 
attempting to kill the brain cells that had spawned 
that pathetic thought. How could I have blown 
such an opportunity? I was fresh out of basic 
training from the army, I grew up on a farm, and 
yes, we had chickens! Where was the explanation 
for this pathetic display of hunting prowess? Was I 
trying to override some not-so-latent ninnyness? 
Aft er some long and brutal self-analysis, I placed 
the blame at the feet of my full belly and bag of 
food. I simply was not hungry enough to take any 
risk, real or imagined.
 Need is a powerful force, and blown opportu-
nities, powerful teachers. Th e lesson of carrying 
at least one hunting weapon at all times and 
maintaining vigilance was not new to me, but 
these are oft en the fi rst “edges” you lose once you 
are out of the woods. An experience such as the 
one I had with the turkey quickly brought that 
edge back to the strop. If you pursue game, for 
food or photo, know that you will be surprised, 
outwitted, stalked, and left in the dust many 
times. Th e key is to look at the situation with the 
eye of both teacher and student. What is the les-
son? What happened and why? Remember the 
questions and any answers that you come up with 
the next time you hunt.
 Hunting is an essential skill for long-term wil-
derness survival. It is through hunting that you 
provide yourself with many of the tools needed to 

 
remain in the wild and the sustenance to survive 
in the shorter term. A short list of the gains made 
through hunting is as follows:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Meat and fat provide: immediate and long-
term sustenance—fresh, jerked, or made into 
pemmican.
Hides give you: leather for clothing and raw-
hide for lashings, snowshoes, hard protective 
cases, cordage, glue, bags, and more.
Sinew is great for: sewing, lashing, backing 
bows (a technique used to add strength to a 
bow), and making bow strings, snare lines, 
and more.
Bones can be made into tools such as: fi shing 
hooks, arrow points, knives, awls, needles, 
and buttons, as well as decorative ornaments. 
Teeth and jawbones can be used for abrading 
or cutting tools.
Guts can be used for pouches, water bags, sau-
sage casing, and lashing.

 Clearly the value of good hunting skills can 
make the diff erence between life and death. Th e 
debate for many new hunters is, sit or move? I am 
an avid roving hunter, because it not only lets me 
hunt many areas and many types of game, it also 
lets me see what is happening on the land around 
my camp. I can collect or note the locations of 
edible plants, fi re-starting materials, and other 
items that I need or may need down the road. Th e 
advantages of still hunting are also noteworthy. 
As a way to put meat in your belly, it is a tried and 
true method. With minimal tracking skills, a 
hunter can determine what areas see a lot of game 
traffi c. You can spend a little time staking out a 
spot to see if a certain track is aging (i.e., you can 
determine how long ago the track was made by 

H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

18 3

noting the past weather or the substrate, and see-
ing how one aff ected the other). If your skills are 
not up to the task, staking out a spot will let you 
know what time of day your quarry frequents the 
area. Th en you have to fi gure out where to set up 
and wait.

MOVING AND SEEING

Th e way in which we as modern people move is 
more of a controlled fall. It is as if we have a string 
attached to our chests or foreheads and are being 
pulled along. Th is results in two problems. First, 
we walk with our body at a slant, our head out in 
front and completely out of balance. Second, we 
look at the ground and consequently see little of 
our surroundings.

For a hunter, balance is paramount. You may 
be called on to stop on a moment’s notice and 
remain motionless, sometimes with only one foot 
on the ground. And the importance of seeing 
cannot be overstated. If you wait until game sees 
you, you will catch very little game.

Stumbling through the woods in an out-of-
balance, non-seeing manner is not likely to yield a 
successful hunt—one of the reasons why many a 
modern hunter prefers to still-hunt. Going 
through the following exercises slowly and care-
fully will have a positive impact on your stalking 
abilities. It is crucial to slow down and raise your 
head.

Start out by standing squarely on your feet. 
With your eyes gazing out levelly, stretch both 
hands out directly in front of yourself, touching 
each other at eye level. Now, while wiggling your 
fi ngers, move your hands simultaneously apart 

 
 
 
 
18 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Bird’s-eye view of range of motion for wide-angle exercise

while maintaining both your forward gaze and 
visual contact of both hands. Bring your hands as 
far back as possible until you can just catch the 
movement of your wiggling fi ngers. You should 
feel a shift in your vision as you do this exercise.
 Th is wide-angle, or splatter, vision is used so 
seldom that your impulse will be to quickly shift 
back to a specifi c point in view. Keep practicing 
until you can shift into wide-angle vision without 
any effort. Athletes in basketball, soccer, and 
other big team sports use this way of seeing to 
visually cover a larger portion of the court or fi eld 
while paying specifi c attention to a particular 
player. You will notice that wide-angle or periph-
eral vision is far more sensitive to movement and 
light. Pinpoint vision (looking from point to point 
to make up a whole picture) is time consuming 
and weak in details pertaining to the overall view. 

Taking one glance in wide-angle vision allows 
you to clearly see the whole picture. For example 
leaves moved out of place by a passing deer lie dif-
ferently on the ground than those that have not 
been disturbed. Wide-angle vision will make the 
trail stand out, whereas pinpoint vision will not.
 Once you are able to easily shift into wide-
angle vision, you are ready to move. While bal-
ancing on one leg, lift the other foot and slowly 
move it forward such a distance that you are able 
to place it fl atly on the ground while applying no 
pressure or weight to it. Remember to bend your 
knees as you move, and do not lock them during 
periods of waiting, as this can result in a sudden 
lurch when you begin stalking again. If you are in 
wide-angle vision, your feet can, to some extent, 
become your eyes on the ground. Prior to apply-
ing weight onto your forward foot, gently touch 

 
the ground with the inside ball of your foot. 
Slowly roll the foot to the outside so that the entire 
ball of the foot is in contact with the ground. Th en 
let your heel and toes settle to the ground as well. 
Be aware of sharp objects or sticks that may break 
under your weight. If your foot is well placed, 
slowly shift your weight from the back foot for-
ward to the newly placed foot, and repeat the pro-
cess. When you are hunting animals, constant, 
even movement at a rate of one step per minute or 
less should enable you to move, even when the 
prey is looking at you. With a lot of slow practice, 
you can move in a brisk walk and eventually a 
similar run.

PREPARING YOURSELF

To prepare for a hunt, it is important to become 
profi cient with your weapon of choice and famil-
iar with your hunting areas. While you are walk-
ing your hunting grounds, ask the following 
questions:

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

From what direction does the wind normally 
come?
What do the prey animals in the area eat? 
What is the best direction to approach prey 
from in a given area?
Will my body be silhouetted against the sky?
What time of day will the sun aid me by being 
at my back?
What type of substrate will I be stalking on or 
through?

These are standard questions, and you will 
undoubtedly add to them as you practice stalking 
prey.

H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

18 5

 Although it is not always possible, I recom-
mend selecting a specifi c, individual animal to 
hunt. Watch it and learn its strengths and weak-
nesses. When is it alert? Does it wander farther 
from its hole than others in the area? How can 
you use its weaknesses to help you put it on the 
table? Deer, for example, fall into many patterns, 
and, given the number of deer and car collisions 
in this area, it is not hard to fi nd a lame deer to 
hunt if the time is taken to observe the local 
population.
 Once your quarry has been established and 
the time has been chosen to hunt, you must pre-
pare. What you do spiritually to make peace with 
the animal that you will hunt and kill is up to you. 
I physically prepare in the following way. In a 
remote setting with few to no human dwellings 
where animals are very sensitive to human scent, 
I will begin days prior to the hunt. I will eat rather 
bland food to help reduce body odor. Th is, com-
bined with a wash in the stream using soapwort 
or another natural, locally present scent, or non-
scented soap, removes my body’s odor. Sweat 
lodges are also a good way to aid in the removal of 
human scent. My clothes are either left out in the 
woods away from camp in a rainstorm or washed 
in the creek and hung to dry. In a pinch, I will 
stand in the smoke of a wood fi re to cover my 
scent; because fi re is natural, smoke does not seem 
to startle the animals unless it is accompanied by 
heat and fl ame. Your rabbit stick or other weapon 
of choice ought to be carved and handled with 
clean hands and either smoke stained or rubbed 
lightly with charcoal to hide any bright white 
carving marks.

In more populated areas de-scenting can 
have little to no eff ect. I have seen hunters still 
hunting while smoking cigarettes and have deer 
pass under their stand. So look over the area you 

 
 
18 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

are in to determine to what level you must 
prepare.

In the following discussion, you will hunt 
using a rabbit stick, and your quarry will be a 
woodchuck.

It is time to start.

 Approach your hunting area carefully. Pay 
attention to the wind, the sun, and anything else 
that might give away your location. Th ere will be 
plenty of times when you will have a dry hunt, 
with no sighting of your game even aft er lots of 
careful preparation. However, when your prey is 
spotted, watch it for a moment before you begin 
stalking. Do not look directly at the animal. 
Watch it only in wide-angle vision, because the 
animal’s sensitivity is acute; the hunt may be over 
before it starts.
 As you stalk, note whether the animal is weary 
or feeding contentedly. Take note of the direction 
in which it is moving and why (as in the case with 
grazers), and try to predict where it may be in 
twenty minutes. If you make a noise, you may 
have to remain motionless for a time until it set-
tles and resumes its normal activity.
 As you approach, bring your weapon to the 
ready so that, once you are in range, you have only 
the release—no cocking back. Once the projectile 
is released and the animal is hit, move quickly 
and quietly to it, ready to give a killing blow if 
necessary. If your initial strike only wounded 
your prey, you must keep it from escaping to its 
hole, where it may die a longer and more painful 
death, leaving you hungry and feeling terrible.
 A mortally wounded animal may sprint off , 
exhibiting no signs of serious injury, only to col-
lapse shortly aft er reaching cover. If your quarry 
successfully reaches cover and you believe that 
you had a solid strike, stay put. Injured animals 
will oft en lie in thickets to recover or rest, and you 

may startle them into fl ight and be unable to fol-
low and catch them. After waiting for about 
twenty to thirty minutes, slowly stalk toward the 
place where you initially struck the animal and 
check for visible tracks or a blood trail. Follow the 
trail as best you can, weapon at the ready, and 
scan the area. If you get a second shot, make it 
count.
 Th e best advice I can give is to practice, prac-
tice, practice! Injuring an animal is worse than 
killing it. If it is dead, you can make sure that its 
body is appreciated and fully utilized. Every time 
you use a tool that incorporates some of that ani-
mal’s body, you can’t help but give thanks. How-
ever, if it is injured, not only does it take an 
unknown toll on the animal, it also takes a toll on 
you as you wonder what is to become of it. Good, 
however, can come from a botched hunt in the 
form of valuable lessons and the vow to never 
repeat the same mistakes.

Be Double-Prepared

It is wise to carry more than one weapon, because 

this allows you to immediately make a follow-up 

strike and ensure that the kill has been made. A 

stunned animal may appear dead and then, as 

you approach, get up and hobble off to safety, 

where it may die from its wounds out of your 

reach. A case in point: While hunting one day, I 

stalked a woodchuck and threw my boomerang, 

bringing the animal down. I approached quickly 

with my spear at the ready and, with ten feet to 

go, saw the woodchuck get up and run. A good 

throw with my spear ensured meat for the eve-

ning meal.

 
 
 
H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

187

 Check local hunting regulations for accept-
able methods of taking game and the licensing 
procedure. Practice hard, hunt well, and give 
thanks.

CAMOUFLAGE

As a supplement to moving carefully, good cam-
oufl age will help you to move unseen through the 
land. Camoufl age is intended to break up the out-
line of a person or object, because it is oft en the 
outline that attracts the eye and is recognized by 
the brain.
 Good camoufl age has two very distinct parts. 
Th e fi rst part is a physical blurring or changing of 
your outline and the distinctive body patterns 
that catch the eye, including the symmetry of the 
face or the series of parallel lines that make up 
your hands. The second part is the mental 
aspect—the quieting of the mind and going into 
wide-angle vision in order to soft en or diff use 
your intent. Many hunters suggest looking below, 
beyond, or to either side of your quarry once it is 
spotted. As children, many of us found out in 
Hide-and-Go-Seek that intensely thinking, 
“Don’t See Me,” or, “I know they are going to fi nd 
me,” draws the attention of the seekers. Animals 
seem to be far more sensitive in this area than 
humans. 
 Of the many types of camoufl age that are 
used by peoples the world over, we will cover two 
here.

Mud Camouflage

Camouﬂ aged person

seldom, as in the case of an ambush for game. 
Some advantages of mud are its ability to decrease 
your scent, the non-skinlike texture it gives your 
body, and the natural dappling it provides as it 
dries. The disadvantages are the potential for 
leaving a trail of mud smudges on leaves and the 
ground as you walk, and its lack of versatility. 
Gray clay, for example, may be perfect camoufl age 
for a streambed but would stick out clearly in the 
forest. Mud also cools the body quickly, even on 
warm days, and a spot in the shade can lead to 
shivering.

Mud camoufl age is especially useful when you 
will either not be moving or you will be moving 

In a moist area or near water, you can make 
mud by pouring water onto the ground and dig-

 
 
18 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

ging in it with your hands or a stick. Th e consis-
tency should be such that it sticks easily and does 
not run or fall off . Once you have an adequate 
supply, apply it liberally to your entire body, being 
careful not to get it into your ear canals or eyes. 
Take the time to see how the mud color compares 
to that of the area in which you plan on hiding. 
Remember, mud changes color as it dries.

Before it dries, however, pick up handfuls of 
dry debris and, with your eyes closed, gently toss 
them over your whole body. Th ey should stick to 
the mud and provide a further breaking up of 
your outline. Glasses can be dipped in mud, and 
then a line in the center of each lens can be 
cleaned to allow you to see with little refl ective 
material exposed. Be careful to avoid scratching 
your lenses.

 Now you are ready to get to your hiding spot. 
Bring an extra handful of mud with which to 
cover the soles of your feet once you are in posi-
tion or for touch-up.
 Move carefully. Too much movement will 
result in much of your camoufl age fl aking off . If 
you brush against plants, you may give away your 
passage by leaving a trail of mud on the leaves.

Charcoal and Ash Camouflage

By far the warmer of the two camoufl age tech-
niques covered here, charcoal and ash camoufl age 
is also better for times when movement is 
required. Charcoal is dry and therefore warmer 
than mud, it does not brush off easily or leave 
obvious signs of your passage, it can be applied to 

Hidden person

 
 
blend with almost anything, and it is easily 
acquired. On the minus side, it is harder to 
remove and can only be eff ectively applied to 
light-colored clothing.
 Charcoal from a wood fi re can be ground up 
and applied as a powder or with water added as a 
paste. White ash, not charcoal, when mixed with 
water into a paste makes lye, an alkali that can 
cause a rash if it contacts your skin. It can, how-
ever, be used dry, and no, it will not harm you if it 
starts to rain or you wash it off .
 Remember—the goal is to break up the out-
line of your body and the symmetry that easily 
defi nes parts of you. As a general rule, you should 
lighten the hollows and darken the ridges. Th is 
does not mean that you should put a black line 
across your brow and down your nose. Mark your 
body with charcoal lines running contrary to 
your body’s natural contours. Soft en the lines by 
gently rubbing your hands over them, smudging 
them. Th is soft ens the edges, dulls the sheen on 
your skin, and gives a dappled eff ect. Finally, dust 
and small debris can be sprinkled over your body. 
Th is may seem insignifi cant, as it does not appear 
to make much diff erence; however, your body’s 
tiny hairs hold on to some of it and can help blend 
you with the background.
 With mud camoufl age, you blend in with a 
specifi c background. With charcoal, you blend in 
with shadows. A few other caveats with mud is 
that when wet it leaves smear marks on anything 
you touch; when it dries, it fl akes off and leaves 
more signs for others to follow. Moving within 
shadow takes practice, because it oft en requires 
movement off -trail through thick and potentially 
noisy debris. You have to learn to trust your cam-
oufl age. Anyone can hide behind an object. Th e 
goal here is to be invisible while you are in the 
open.

H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

18 9

CARCASS CARE

Your hunt was a success! You are standing over a 
freshly killed mammal. Now what? Proper care of 
the carcass is just as important as the hunt. When 
an animal dies, the bacteria within the gut and 
intestines continue to live and thrive. Th e result is 
ever-expanding gas that will rupture the intes-
tines and foul the meat if the intestines and guts 
are not removed immediately. Additionally, the 
removal of the internal organs, intestines, and 
blood speeds the cooling process and thus helps 
delay decomposition. Th e essential step are:

1. Checking to be sure the animal is dead
2. Bleeding the animal
3. Field dressing or gutting the animal
4. Skinning the animal
5. Cutting or butchering the animal
6. Utilizing the bones

 Approach the animal carefully and look for 
signs of life, such as movement from breathing or 
blinking. You can touch the eye with a stick to see 
if it blinks; if it does, you need to fi nish off the 
animal.

Bleeding the Animal

Cut the throat by driving a knife from the side of 
the neck just below the lower jaw, through to the 
other side. Th en cut out the front of the neck. Th is 
is faster and easier than cutting through the hair, 
which can dull a knife very quickly. (Hair from a 
wild pig will dull your knife after only a few 
inches of cutting. When I worked as a hog hunter 
for the National Park Service, I was shocked at 
just how tough the hog’s hair is; all cuts beside the 
initial entry cuts were made from the inside out.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Blood clots fast when it is not being moved by the 
heart. If you complete this process quickly, the 
blood will gush out readily. Placing the animal 
with its head downhill can aid in bleeding an ani-
mal. In the case of smaller animals like squirrels, 
the meat can be soaked in cold water and the 
blood allowed to leach out aft er completing the 
steps below.

Field Dressing or Gutting

I will use a deer in this example.

Bucks during the rut have active scent glands 
on the inside of their hind legs—tuft s of hair with 
a smell you can’t miss. These strong-smelling 
glands can be removed if you don’t like the smell 
or are afraid of the meat becoming contaminated 
through long hanging in such proximity to the 
glands. Pull on the long hair to draw the hide 
away from the leg, then slice through the hide 
behind and toss the glands away. (Th e udders of 
does can be easily removed in the same manner.) 
Aft er dealing with the scent glands or udder, fol-
low the steps below:

1. Position the deer on its back, and cut 
around the anus (and vagina if the deer is 
a female) to a depth of three inches.

2. Th e urinary tract of male mammals trav-
els from the bladder back through the pel-
vis next to the small intestine. It then loops 
back along the belly toward the chest. A 
buck’s penis is located on the belly toward 
the rear. Make a small cut at the upper 
base of the penis toward the back while 
holding the penis up and away from the 
body. Th is will allow you to separate the 
penis from the carcass all the way back to 
just below the anus.

Primary cuts around the anus

Separating the penis from the belly

Starting at the sternum

3. Feel down the sternum (breastbone) until 
you come to the soft spot at the end (the 
xyphoid process). Pinch a bit of skin, about 
one-half inch, and pull it up and away 
from the carcass. Slice through the skin 

 
 
 
 
 
and thin layer of muscle, being careful to 
avoid cutting through the stomach. If you 
see green matter, you have cut too deeply 
and will have to deal with the stench as 
well as wash out the cavity later.

4. Once the cut goes all the way through the 
abdominal wall, slide your index and mid-
dle fi ngers of the non-cutting hand into 
the abdominal cavity, palm up and facing 
the rear of the animal. Holding a knife in 
your right hand, place the blade, cutting 
edge up, between the two fi ngers in the 
abdominal cavity, and slide both the blade 
and your fi ngers to cut the abdominal wall 
down to the pelvis. To further protect 
against cutting the stomach and intes-
tines, you can lift the abdominal wall with 
your two fi ngers guiding the knife. I will 
oft en continue the cut to the anus, cutting 
through the muscle between the legs until 
I hit bone. Th is allows the legs to spread to 
either side and gives easier access for cut-
ting any remaining connective tissue that 
is still holding the end of the intestines 
and urinary tract in place.

5. Above the stomach is the diaphragm, a 
divider made of muscle tissue that sepa-
rates the abdominal cavity from the tho-

Unzipping the gut

H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

191

racic (chest) cavity. Cut the diaphragm 
free from the chest wall on both sides, 
back to the spine.

6. Reach up into the chest cavity toward the 
neck and feel the windpipe, a hard-ribbed 
tube. Cut this as high up as possible. Grip-
ping the windpipe, pull it back toward 
you; the organs (heart and lungs and, in 
the intestinal cavity, the liver and the kid-
neys) and diaphragm are attached and 
will now be exposed. Th e connections that 
have not yet been severed along the spine 
are weak and can usually be torn by pull-
ing forcefully on the windpipe.

7. The heart, liver, and kidneys are great 
cubed and put in a stew. Harvest the organs 
you wish to eat, and, if possible, set them 
in cold water to help the blood leach out.
8. It is now possible to pull the guts out of the 
abdominal cavity. Grasp the terminal end 
of the small intestines and urinary tract 
from inside the abdominal cavity. Pull 
them through the pelvis and out the inci-
sion along with the rest of the guts and 
organs.

9. Tilt the carcass so that any blood within 
the cavity can drain out through the 
pelvis.

Skinning

Some animals part with their hides more easily 
than others. Deer, for example, can be skinned 
completely by hand once the primary cuts have 
been made. Wild hogs and woodchucks, on the 
other hand, need a blade to help separate the hide 
from the carcass. Th ese primary cuts should be 
made just through the hide and not into the fl esh. 
Skinning, when done well, is a bloodless process.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
192 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

between the hide and the carcass. Th is is prefera-
ble to using a knife, because it avoids scoring or 
otherwise damaging the hide. Bits of connective 
tissue, such as little tendons connecting the hide 
to the muscle, allow the animal to shake or shiver 
portions of its skin to rid itself of fl ies. Th ese con-
nectors can be broken singly by hand; however, 
when you are sliding your hand between the car-
cass and the hide, you may grab a number of them 
at once. Pulling hard on these thin, bunched con-
nectors can result in a “paper cut.”

If you do use a knife or sharp stone as a skin-
ning aid, pull the hide away from the carcass, and 
gently cut the stretched tissue with the cutting 
edge angled toward the carcass and not the hide. 
Th is way, if you overcut, the damage is done to the 
fl esh and not to the hide.

Butchering

According to the USDA, food kept at 0°F can 
remain safe indefi nitely, and at 40˚F, for two to 
three days. I have let carcasses hang for three weeks 
at temperatures in the thirties with no bad odor or 
ill eff ects. Animals taken in the warm summer 
months are a diff erent matter and should be butch-
ered as soon as possible, because bacteria multiply 
rapidly in the “danger zone” (40°F to 140°F).
 Hanging the carcass of an animal larger than 
a fox serves two purposes. First, it makes the skin-
ning and butchering process much easier. Th e 
height can be adjusted, and you have access to all 
parts of the carcass. Second, letting the animal 
hang lets enzymes within the meat begin to break 
down the muscle and connective tissue, making it 
tender and soft ening the gamey fl avor. Hanging is 
not a necessity but a preference among most hunt-
ers. I recommend hanging a carcass for about one 
week, weather permitting.

Primary cuts

Here are the primary cuts:

1. Cut all the way around each leg at the sec-

ond joint above the foot.

2. Make a cut from the anus along the belly 
to the lower jaw (usually done during fi eld 
dressing).

3. On the inside of all four limbs, make cuts 
to connect the ring cuts on the legs to the 
median cut on the belly and chest.

4. Make one ring cut around the neck and 

you are fi nished.

 With some animals, deer especially, the hide 
can be pulled away from the carcass with one 
hand, and your free hand can knead down 

 
 
 
 
 
 
H U N T I N G M E T H O D S 

193

 A dry crust forms on the exposed meat as 
moisture evaporates from it. Th is crust must be 
trimmed off before you consume the meat. Th e 
longer the meat hangs, the thicker the crust and 
therefore the greater the loss of meat. Leaving the 
hide on the carcass protects the meat and keeps 
in the moisture but makes skinning more 
diffi cult.
 A simple way to get a heavy carcass off of the 
ground is to make a hole through each hind leg at 
the point that corresponds to the human heel. On 
most animals it looks more like a backward-
bending knee than a heel. Make the cut in the 
thin part of the leg between the Achilles tendon 
(which comes from the muscle above) and at the 
leg bone that runs parallel to the tendon. You can 
use a spreader stick to keep the animal’s legs 
spread by placing it between the hind legs so that 
it forces them apart. If the spreader is strong and 
is placed in the holes that you made in the back 
legs, you can lash the legs to it to keep them apart; 
then use the spreader stick to hang the deer from 
a branch.
 Th e easiest method for lift ing heavy game is to 
cut a strong, ten-foot sapling that has a Y in the 
upper portion. Trim off all other branches and 
place the sapling over a strong branch of another 
tree, about fi ve feet off of the ground. With the Y 
end of the sapling on the ground near the carcass, 
lash the spreader stick to the fork in the Y and, 
seesaw-like, pull the raised end downward and tie 
it to a stake in the ground. If you have help, you 
can lift the deer and fasten a piece of cordage to 
the spreader stick, tying the other end to a sturdy 
branch.

In temperatures above 40˚F, all meat that is 
not to be consumed immediately must be dried to 
be preserved. (See “Drying Meat” under “Preserv-
ing Food” in Chapter 9.) To preserve meat in 

Hanging deer

freezing temperatures, the carcass can be cut into 
meal-size chunks.

I remove some of the best cuts fi rst, like the 
back strap on either side of the spine. Th ese long 
muscles are very tender and easy to remove. Start 
by making cuts down either side of the center 
ridge of the spine. With your fi ngers in the cut, 
slide your hand up and down the incision while 
pushing them into the carcass. A second skin or 
membrane covering the back strap should now be 
evident and can easily be pulled and cut away. 
Work your fi ngers into the fl esh along the initial 
incision until you reach bone, then pull the mus-
cle away from the carcass. Carefully tear or cut 
any fl esh that is still connected to the rib cage.
 Th e legs can be divided easily by cutting them 
at the joints or separating muscle groups. Por-
tions of the carcass with little bits of meat still 
attached can be cooked and eaten within a few 
days (temperature permitting) or pulled from the 
bone, rolled into a ball, and frozen for later use.

Utilize the Bones

Bones for tools (if you don’t want the marrow) can 
be broken open with rocks to allow access for 

 
 
 
bugs and placed on an anthill for quick cleaning. 
But their chance of being taken by scavengers is 
very high. I oft en place bones in trees or hang 
them with cordage, and within a month they are 
pretty clean. If I am in a rush to use the bones, I 
break and boil them to quickly remove the oils 
and marrow. (Th e broth is highly nutritious.) If 
time is not an issue, leave them out up to a year, 
because this allows the oils to break down and 
gives you a solid, white piece of bone (as opposed 
to an oily, translucent one).

19 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Back strap

 
C H A P T E R 1 4

R AWHIDE, TANNING HIDES 
FOR BUCKSKIN, AND SINEW

When you are living off of the land, tools such 

as rope, fabric, and thread are very useful and can 
be employed in a great variety of ways. Rawhide—
animal hide that has been fl eshed, degreased, and 
dried (either with the hair still on or removed)—
can be soaked to a fl imsy, stretchable material and 
be used to lash anything from knife handles to 
footwear. Sinew, the tendon, is so strong that, 
even when it is separated into individual thin 
strands, it can be used for anything from sewing 
thread to reversed-wrapped bow strings (see 
“Cordage and Cloth,” Chapter 15). Buckskin, the 
fi nest fabric of all, is soft . It is treated animal hide 
that makes great clothing for any occasion, from 
weddings to hunting trips. Its versatility and com-
fort to the wearer are of great value.

R AWHIDE

Rawhide is animal skin that has merely had the 
fl esh side scraped to remove any fat and fl esh left 
on during the skinning process. Oft en the hair is 
removed as well. Rawhide is great for making 
lashings; hard cases for items like bone hooks, 
needles, or pemmican; shoe soles; cordage; and 
more. Th e great value of it is that, when it is wet, it 

195

is elastic and can be tied around objects like stone 
hammerheads, snowshoes, etc. As it dries, it 
shrinks and hardens. Of course, the reverse is also 
true. When it gets wet, it soft ens and stretches. 
Methods for protecting rawhide from the eff ects 
of moisture will be addressed shortly.
 To make rawhide, you will need a green (fresh) 
or soaked wet hide, which can be prepared using 
either of the two methods below.

Racked-Hide or Dry-Scrape Method

Matt Richards, author of Deerskins into Buckskins 
(see Appendix), told me that dry-scraping hides 
for rawhide or buckskin was practiced by very few 
native peoples. It is signifi cantly harder than the 
wet-scrape method when you are using nonmetal 
tools, and its only advantage as far as I am con-
cerned is in the freedom to let the hide sit and 
work on it fi ft een minutes here and ten minutes 
there (although wouldn’t you rather just fi nish 
it?). For larger and tougher hides to fl esh, like 
moose and bison, Richards says that it is a reason-
able approach, although for smaller animals, deer 
included, the wet-scrape method is the way to go. 
Th at said, it can be done and therefore is included 
here for rawhide, but not in the tanning section 
later in this chapter.

19 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

 Racking a hide is merely a way of supporting a 
hide within an external framework, like an artist 
framing a canvas. Most commonly, four poles are 
laid out on the ground in a rectangle (a one-foot 
margin around the hide allows for stretching) 
and lashed at the corners. Th e hide, while still 
green, is placed in the middle of the framework, 
and holes are made in the edges about every three 
to fi ve inches or less and about one-half inch in 
from the edge, although with some thinner areas 
I’ll inset them up to one and one-half inches. All 
holes should be a one-half-inch slit parallel to the 
nearest edge.
 One method of racking the hide requires that 
it fi rst be centered in the rack. Tie the four corners 
fi rst—not tight, just snug for now. Lace the hide to 
the rack by starting at the bottom. Tie the lacing 
or cordage to the frame, then run it through the 
corresponding hole in the hide and back to the 
frame again. Continue this process all the way 
around the hide, lashing each side tighter than 
the last one so that the fourth side tightens the 
hide like a drum.

I fi nd this to be overly labor intensive, how-
ever. I fi nd it more effi cient to fi rst lace the top of 
the hide (the neck area) to the top of the rack 
using one piece of cordage, then to lace the bot-
tom with another. Th ese are snugged up, and then 
the two sides are laced. Th e whole hide is then 
adjusted to remove wrinkles. Be careful not to 
overtighten or the holes in the hide may tear out.
 Due to the hide stretching while wet and 
shrinking while drying, you will need to snug up 
some of the lashings during the scraping process. 
It is also advisable, when you are lacing, to run all 
ties from the back of the hide to the back of the 
frame, around the frame to the front, and then 
through the hole in the front of the hide. Th is will 
keep the hide on a single plane rather than having 
one tie pulling the hide toward the back of the 
frame and the next pulling toward the front.

Lean the racked hide against a tree and, start-
ing with the stake scraper (see Chapter 16) per-
pendicular to the hide, scrape downward from 
the neck. All fl esh and fat should peel away and 
run down the hide. Be careful not to slide the 
scraper sideways and slice the hide.

A racked deer hide

Working position for using a bone scraper

Hide

 
 
 
R AW H I D E , TAN N I N G H I D E S F O R B U C K SK I N, A N D SIN E W 

197

 To remove the hair on a dry hide, soak the 
hide until the hair “slips” (comes out when gently 
pulled). Soak times vary. In cold, clear, fl owing 
water, it can take three weeks. In a bucket of water, 
changed once daily, it takes half that time or less. 
Warm water makes the time even shorter still—
three or four days. If a few big rocks are used to 
weigh down the hide, make sure to shift them 
periodically, because their weight compresses the 
hide and does not allow it to fully absorb water, 
thus preventing the hair from slipping. Once the 
hair slips, the above process can be repeated for 
the hair side of the hide.

I prefer to soak hides until the hair slips prior 
to fl eshing and thus avoid having to rack the hide 
twice. Th is is OK if the hide was skinned well and 
no chunks of fat remain. (I skin any hide that I 
want to use, and in the case of deer, I use a knife 
only for the primary cuts.) The hair can be 
removed while the hide is completely dry, but it 
requires a lot of elbow grease and, in my opinion, 
may only be worth it if you use a sharp, metal 
scraper. Once the hair is removed, the hide can 
be dried and stored indefinitely. It’s rawhide 
ready to go.

Skinned-Log or Wet-Scrape Method

You will need a smooth, peeled log and a broad 
scraper (see Chapter 16). Place the hide, hair side 
down, on the log, leaving a bit of the hide hanging 
over one raised end. Leaning against the log, and 
pinching the overhanging hide between it and 
your body, scrape downward, using the scraper 
like a squeegee. All fat and meat should run down 
the hide.
 Another setup that I fi nd easier on the back is 
to lean the log against a tree in a more vertical 
attitude. In this orientation, I call the log a 

Fleshing a hide on the beam 

Vertical beam setup

 
 
19 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

“beam.” Th e hide is held by pinching it between 
the top of the beam and the tree. Work your way 
from side to side (not neck to tail) on the top por-
tion, then pull the hide farther up the beam and 
continue until you are fi nished.

Soak the hide as described earlier. Once the 
hair slips, the hide can be placed, hair side up, on 
the beam and scraped in the same direction as the 
hair until all is removed. Th e hide can be spread 
out to dry and then stored indefi nitely. It should 
be noted that a thin layer of skin oft en comes off 
with the hair; it is not the grain that must be 
removed for tanning the hide, so don’t get 
excited.

Working with Rawhide

To make lashings or laces, a circle can be cut from 
the hide and a continuous spiral can be cut into it, 
like when you peel an apple, without breaking the 
skin. One method I have found to be eff ective is to 
stick a razor-sharp knife in a log and, while grasp-
ing the dry disk in both hands, pull it into the 
blade where the blade enters the log, moving the 
disk in a spiral until you have turned the whole 
thing into a thin strip. To use the lace, soak it for a 
few hours until it is elastic, then make your lash-
ings and let them dry.

Coil method for cutting rawhide

Stretching the lace before using it will reduce 
the loosening and soft ening eff ects of moisture on 
lashings. To do this, tie one end of the wet raw-
hide lace to a tree, stretch it taut, tie it to another 
tree, and let it dry. You can also waterproof the 
lashings on items like hammerheads that do not 
need to fl ex: Cover them with a light layer of pine 
pitch and sprinkle them with ash. Too much pure 
pitch can penetrate the hide on hot days and 
soft en the lashing, so mix in plenty of ground-up 
charcoal.

TANNING

To turn a hide into leather, you must take it a few 
steps beyond rawhide. As with rawhide, there are 
wet and dry methods, but I will not address the 
dry-scrape method for reasons mentioned previ-
ously. Read through this entire section before you 
try your fi rst hide, because there is some advance 
preparation required for time-sensitive parts of 
the tanning process.
 Th e goal of scraping the hide is to remove the 
membrane, fat, and fl esh on the inside of the hide 
and to remove the hair, epidermis, and grain on 
the outside. Th e epidermis, a very thin layer of 
skin, comes away easily with the hair, while the 
grain is a thicker and more stubborn layer requir-
ing more coaxing and/or brute force and determi-
nation to remove. Th e removal of these parts of the 
hide opens the door for the penetration of tanning 
agents that are introduced later in the process.
 Once the fl esh side has been cleaned of meat 
and fat, the wet, green hide can be scraped right 
away. If the hide has been dried for storage, it 
should be soaked either in a container or a body 
of water until the hair slips and the hide is swol-

 
 
 
R AW H I D E , TAN N I N G H I D E S F O R B U C K SK I N, A N D SIN E W 

19 9

len. Graining a hide that has been dried at some 
earlier point is harder than working with a green 
or bucked hide (see below). If the water you are 
using is in a container, or you placed the hide in a 
stagnant pool of warmer water, the process will 
go pretty fast—three or four days—but the hide 
will also get pretty ripe. In fl owing or cold water, 
this can take much longer—even weeks. Another 
option is bucking the hide.

Bucking the Hide

Bucking (steps 1 through 7 that follow) consists of 
soaking the green hide as a way to ease its prepa-
ration for becoming buckskin. Richards (Deer-
skins into Buckskins, 1997) is a strong advocate for 
bucking in a white ash and water solution. While 
this is not exactly necessary, it reduces the num-
ber of times you must repeat step 11, and it reduces 
the chance of taking the process partly through 
step 12 and then having to go back to the beam. It 
is well worth the eff ort, because it makes the grain 
more visible and hence easier to remove; in addi-
tion, it eases the penetration of oils into the hide 
at a later time.

For bucking in primitive settings, Richards 
says that coating the fl esh side of the hide with an 
ash slurry and burying it in a hole in the ground 
for three days works well. Dug- or burned-out 
logs or stumps can also provide an adequate con-
tainer for soaking.
 Th e alkali nature of the ash mixture can cause 
rashes and excessively dry hands and aff ects some 
people more than others. I keep it off of the insides 
of my arms, but my hands fare OK, although they 
get very dried out. Hardwood ash makes for a 
more alkaline slurry than soft wood ash.

I have seen eggs used as gauges of the specifi c 
gravity of the solution to ensure a good mix with-

out having it become too alkaline. Th e solution, 
once mixed, is left to sit for about fi ft een minutes 
while you let the ash settle. A chicken egg placed 
in the water without being supported by a layer of 
ash should show a circle at the waterline at least 
the size of a quarter. If the egg fl oats on its side, 
the mixture is too strong; if it sinks or rests just at 
the surface, it is too weak.

I use whatever is in the fi repit, which usually 
is a mixture of hard- and soft wood ash. Given the 
lesser alkali content in the soft woods, I haven not 
bothered with the egg test on the grounds that 
fi nding a chicken egg in the wilderness is pretty 
unlikely. (And if you’re thinking, “Why not use 
wild turkey eggs?” think back to the last fi ve times 
you found a nest full of newly laid wild-turkey 
eggs.)
 Here is the drill for tanning the hide.

1. Dampen three to four gallons of white 

ash.

2. Aft er there is no more dry ash, continue 
adding water slowly while stirring with a 
stick until the consistency is thick and 
soupy. I try for a mixture that is wet 
enough to allow pouring without being 
lumpy—like pancake batter. Th e solution 
needs to be liquid enough to penetrate the 
hide easily.

3. If your containers are on the smaller side, 
de-hair the hide fi rst; wring it out com-
pletely, then add a little solution to your 
largest empty container. Place part of the 
hide into the container so that one layer 
covers the bottom. Add more solution on 
top of the hide and fold in another layer of 
hide. Add more solution and so on until 
the hide is covered. Note: With smaller 
containers, your project will require more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 0 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

hide gunk, but chances are you have not 
gone deep enough. You want to remove 
the grain—a porous yet smooth, tangibly 
thick layer under the top layer of skin (the 
top layer comes off easily with slipping 
hair). Th e grain comes off leaving a dis-
tinctively different surface underneath. 
You may need to look closely to see the 
diff erence.

9. Once you get a spot started, keep working 
the hide from there and make sure to over-
lap each stroke. Th is is especially tedious 
for the beginner, and I clearly remember 
bouncing all over the hide, taking some 
hair from here and a patch of grain from 
there. Soon I did not know which areas I 
had done and which ones I had not. Th is 
meant that if I wanted leather, I had to go 
over the entire hide again systematically, 
scraping as if I had never touched the 
hide.

 10. Be careful around holes and scores or 
knife marks. To deal with holes from 
arrows, bullets, or bad skinning, scrape 
the hide toward the hole only. Do not pass 
over the hole; just bring the scraper up to 
the edge or you will, in all likelihood, tear 
the hide.

 11. Do a careful once-over of the fl esh side. I 
usually am a bit lax on this portion if I’ve 
been thorough the fi rst time through, but 
it did cause a problem one time when I left 
a large area with membrane intact.
 12. Rinse the hide well in a pond, creek, or 
bucket of water. Th is step is key to getting 
good results. Warmer, moving water 
rinses the hide faster than cold, slow- 
moving water. When you are soaking the 
hide in a pond or creek, just tie some cord-

Putting in the hide for bucking

tending and more time. You may not be 
able to fit a hair-on winter hide into a 
given container, but a summer hide might 
fi t just fi ne.

4. Place some wood or bark over the top of 
the hide, and put a weight on that. Th e 
wood spreads the weight out so that no 
part of the hide is compressed unduly, 
which can inhibit and/or prevent the solu-
tion from penetrating the hide.

5. Keep extra solution on hand to add to the 
hide-soaking container, because the lack 
of a sealing lid will allow for water loss 
from evaporation. Also make sure that no 
part of the hide is exposed to the air dur-
ing this time.

6. Let the hide soak until it is very swollen, 

usually two or three days.

7. Rinse off the ash and place the swollen, 
soaked hide on the beam such that the 
neck is the fi rst area worked. Th is is the 
hardest to scrape but makes your job eas-
ier for all of the remaining steps in the 
entire process. If you need some encour-
agement, choose another starting point.
8. Begin with a small area and work it as 
hard as you can. At fi rst, you will get some 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R AW H I D E , TAN N I N G H I D E S F O R B U C K SK I N, A N D SIN E W 

2 01

age through a hole and anchor the hide to 
a rock for twenty-four hours or more, and 
stir it around occasionally. If you use a 
container, the water must be changed 
oft en (every three or four hours) for the 
better part of two days to ensure that the 
alkali in the hide has been neutralized. To 
check for proper rinsing, look for any 
swollen or rubbery areas on the hide: 
Th ere shouldn’t be any. Th e hide should 
look as it did before, with its white/blue 
color.

 13. To wring out the hide, place it over a two-
inch-diameter branch, neck down, with 
the hind end falling six inches on one side 
while the rest hangs on the other side. 
Spread it out along the branch, and then 
bring the neck end up and over the hind 
end, overlapping it by about six inches so 
that it makes a sleeve of sorts with the 
branch inside of it. Starting on one edge, 
roll the sleeve up as you would on a shirt 
until you reach the midpoint of the hide. 
Do the same on the other edge. Insert a 
rabbit stick or smooth, sturdy branch into 
the bottom of the loop that has been 
formed by the rolled hide, and twist in one 
direction until you are unable to twist any 
farther. Hold the twist until the drips slow, 
then reverse the twist. Untwist and grip 
the hide at the point where it contacts the 
branch, and pull downward, sliding the 
hide around the branch until the point is 
midway between the branch and the low-
est part of the hide. Wring it again. Follow 
the same procedure for a total of four dif-
ferent wringing positions.

 14. Open the hide and check to ensure that it 
has been wrung out well. Th e color should 

1.

3.

2.

4.

Wringing sequence

be translucent white with a few grayish 
soggy spots; a few soggy spots are man-
ageable, but too many may require another 
shot at the wringing station. Stretch the 
hide by hand over your knee, over the end 
of your fl eshing beam, or over the wring-
ing branch. As it stretches, it should turn 
an opaque white and look more like 
leather. Any wet spots should be squee-
geed out. I stretch those spots on the stake 
and, with a cloth, soak up any moisture 
that has been forced out. Th e next step 
should be ready to go, because you don’t 
want the hide to dry at this stage.
 15. With the brains of the animal in a con-
tainer, add an equal volume of hot water 
(not too hot for your hands or you risk 
cooking the hide), and knead the brains 
with your fi ngers. Crush up any lumps 
and make as smooth of a soup as you can 
manage. Add another third of a gallon of 

 
2 02 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

hot water and thoroughly mix up the 
solution.

 16. Dangle the hide into the brains with one 
hand while, with your other hands, ensur-
ing that all of the hide entering gets a good 
coating. Th e hide’s edges (to include the 
edges of holes) usually need special atten-
tion; i.e., take hold of an edge with one 
hand and grab the same edge a few inches 
down with your other hand, and pull. 
Stretch the hide in diff erent directions to 
really encourage solution penetration.

 17. Make sure that the hide is totally satu-
rated. With your fingers kneading and 
stretching the hide, work your way over 
the whole thing, ensuring that there are 
no stiff , nonfl exible areas. It should feel 
just like it did when it was fresh.

 18. Ring the hide out thoroughly before 
repeating steps 16, 17, and 18 so that the 
hide has been in the brains three times 
and is well wrung out before you proceed 
to step 19. Aft er the fi nal wringing, open 
the hide and check for wet spots; deal with 
them as before. If you have not bucked the 
hide, repeat the braining and wringing 
steps eight times. Th is will aff ord you the 
greatest chance of success.

 19. From this point on, the hide must be 
stretched and worked continuously as it 
dries. Any area of the hide that dries with-
out being worked may have a tanned-
leather feel to the outside, yet it will be stiff 
and papery on the inside. I prefer, when 
working a hide alone, to use a stake. Th is 
is made by cutting a three-inch-diameter 
sapling off at about three feet off of the 
ground and leaving the trunk with a 

wedge-shaped top. Round off the corners 
and sharp edges, but only slightly. Th e 
hide is worked on the stake by throwing 
the hide over it and pulling, pushing, and 
stretching it against the tip—really force it 
and push hard. I’ll go from the stake to sit-
ting on a log with the hide stretched over 
my knees and continue working it by both 
forcing my knees apart and stretching the 
hide over one or the other of my knees. An 
overhanging branch can also be used to 
good eff ect if all branch nubs have been 
removed. Place the hide over the branch 
as you would hang it to dry on a clothes-
line, grasp each overhanging edge, and, 
pulling hard, slide it back and forth over 
the branch. Rotate the hide frequently to 
hit all parts.

 While it is best to use a systematic approach 
to ensure that every part of the hide gets worked, 
you must be fl exible and tend to the areas that 
dry faster (like the edges, the belly skin, and the 
leg areas) while not neglecting the thicker parts. 
Except when you are working around holes, don’t 
worry about tearing the hide—it is very tough. If 
you have a helper, the process will go much faster. 
Cold, damp days are worth skipping unless you 
want to be at this stage all day. Optimally, you 
should aim for a dry, warm day or shelter out of 
direct sun to work your hide. I have found that 
direct sun can dry the hide faster than I can work 
it. Stiff spots on the outside need to be addressed, 
usually by rubbing them with something rough 
like sandstone. Interior stiff ness requires a trip 
back to the stake for a hard working over. Pull 
the hide in every possible direction to stretch out 
that spot.

 
R AW H I D E , TAN N I N G H I D E S F O R B U C K SK I N, A N D SIN E W 

2 03

A stake and staking

Hide pin

Smoking the Hide

Once the hide is dry, it will feel light and fl uff y, 
and, if it is clean, it will be totally white. To fi nish 
it, it must be smoked. Th is process will preserve 
all of the work you did in the tanning process 
when the hide gets wet from washing or through 
incidental wettings. 

1. A pit must be dug about two feet deep and 
hardwood kindling gathered, along with 
some punky wood. If you don’t want to 
build a tripod, dig the hole beneath a 
branch that is about six feet off of the 
ground. Light the fi re and let it burn down 
to make a good bed of coals while you pre-
pare the hide.

2. Th e hide must be sewn into a sack. Th e 
stiff hide edges are trimmed off , and then 
the hide is folded in half lengthwise, with 

the edges matched up as best as can be 
managed. Stitch, or pin, the matched 
edges together all the way from the top 
(neck area), which needs to remain open, 
to the bottom.

3. A skirt, which is to be attached to the 
open end of the sack, can be made from 
old hide or cloth. To make the skirt, sew a 
piece of fabric to form a fl ared sleeve and 
attach it to the open edge of the hide sack. 
If the circumference of the skirt is greater 
than that of the hide sack opening, merely 
stitch all the way around and fold the 
remaining fabric over against the skirt, 
and stitch.

I have smoked two hides without the 
benefi t of a skirt, but doing so entails the 
risk that the lower hide may get too hot, 
stiff en, and end up brittle and basically 

 
 
 
 
 
2 0 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

useless. Smoking of the lower part of the 
hide without a skirt requires special 
 attention or it will not receive adequate 
amounts of smoke. If you forgo the skirt, 
do not trim off the stiff hide of the neck; 
instead, let those edges touch the ground, 
and anchor them to stakes with cordage 
that has been run through holes made in 
the lower edges of the neck. Gaps between 
the ground and the hide can be blocked 
with any debris or sod available.

4. With a bed of coals thick on the fl oor of 
the pit, tie the hide to the overhanging 
branch or tripod, and adjust the height so 
that about three inches of the skirt touch 
the ground. Pull the skirt away from the 
hole and secure it.

Smoking a hide, cutaway view

5. Insert three or four sticks or spreaders 
(less than pencil thickness) up into the 
hide sack so that the walls are held apart 
and there are no folds or sags.

6. Cover the coals with shredded, punky 
wood, making sure that the edges of the 
pit have as much punk as the middle of the 
pit (too oft en, the edges get neglected and 
the wood fl ares up and damages the hide). 
You should be able to hold your hand over 
the pit at the height of the bottom of the 
hide without burning it. If not, the fi re 
needs to burn down a bit, or you need a 
longer skirt or deeper hole.

7. Once it is clear that a fl are-up is unlikely, 
spread the skirt over the pit and seal the 
edges to the ground with weights. Give the 
hide about four minutes before grasping 
the point of a spreader through the hide 
(from the outside), and reposition the 
other end in a diff erent spot on the far wall 
of the hide. Repeat the process until all 
spreaders have had both points moved. If 
they are left in place, little white spots will 
remain white and unsmoked.

8. Aft er ten to fi ft een minutes, remove the 
hide, turn it inside out, and, if the color 
goals are met, repeat the process for the 
unsmoked side.

 Different woods will give different colors, 
from the greenish of the spruce to the yellow of 
the aspen, but there are always many contributing 
factors that will cause variations from one smok-
ing to another. With too much time on your 
hands, you may fi nd joy in making a tie-dyed sort 
of buckskin or perhaps loincloths patterned with 
leaf prints . . . or perhaps not.

 
 
 
 
 
 
R AW H I D E , TAN N I N G H I D E S F O R B U C K SK I N, A N D SIN E W 

2 0 5

 You’re done! Th e hide can now be used to 
make a variety of clothing items.

SINEW

Grease Tanning

A cat once killed a weasel and left the carcass in 
the driveway, so I skinned it. Once the hide was 
free of the body, I wanted to fl esh it, so I put it on 
my leg, fl esh side up, and, using my knife as a 
squeegee, scraped down its length and watched a 
little wave of oil run before my blade. Eventually 
the oil was harder to see, and I put the skin away. 
Weeks later, I came across the dried-out little 
thing and found that, upon handling, it soft ened 
up. I buff ed it between my hands and found I was 
holding a grease-tanned hide.

I have been playing with this method on bob-
cat, fi sher, and mink: all have oily skin that is 
conducive to this process. A good indicator as to 
which hides you can grease tan is when you see 
so much oil you are at a loss as to how to get rid of 
it all. I have heard that fox and coyote are too dry 
to grease tan, but I have not attempted this 
method with those animals. 
 Th e area in which much of the work needs to 
happen is in the staking or stretching depart-
ment, especially if you wish to keep the hair on. 
Th e fi bers need to be well stretched to allow for 
penetration of the oils. Th e risk in learning this 
technique is the possibility of damaging a hide 
permanently. If there is too much oil or grease, 
you end up with grease burn, where the hide 
becomes stiff and translucent and sometimes 
almost transparent—great for primitive windows 
but lousy for anything else. If too much oil is 
removed, then you end up with a crinkly, dry 
hide that needs to be tanned with the brain- 
tanning method.

Sinew or tendon is found on the legs or along the 
back straps of animals (the long muscles on either 
side of the spine). In the legs of deer, it is a white, 
fl exible bundle on the backside of the leg bones. 
Smaller bundles can also be found on the front 
side. Leg sinew just needs to be cut out and have 
the clear sheath removed (done by slicing length-
wise, opening the bundle and pulling out the fi ber 
bundles).
 Th e sinew is on the surface of the muscle on 
the deer’s back. Th e sinew here is more silvery in 
color and fl at instead of in a bundle. Harvest the 
back sinew as you would skin a section of hide.
 Hang harvested sinew, and let it dry in a spot 
out of direct sunlight. When it is dry, the sinew 
should be beaten between a smooth rock and a 
piece of wood or chewed to separate the fi bers. 
Once it is partially separated, rub it briskly 
between your hands to finish off the job. The 
fi bers are now ready to be twisted into cordage or 
used as thread.

Deer leg showing sinew location

 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 5

COR DAGE AND 
CRUDE CLOTH

Cordage is the nuts and bolts, the nails and 

• 

screws, the very twine in the yarn of the land. 
Cordage is used, among other things, for bow-
strings, snowshoe bindings, basket handles, bolas, 
snares, nets, fi shing line, lashings, bags, and belts. 
It is also used for sewing, weaving, making a fi re 
with a bow drill, and building shelters. Some 
fi bers are soft er and better for skin contact, while 
others may be scratchy yet incredibly strong.
 Of the many cordage options available, most 
fi t into one of three categories:

Cordage can be made from almost any plant, 
although the quality will vary considerably. 
Velvet leaf, fi reweed, evening primrose, cat-
tail, wild grape, bullrush, grasses, conifer 
rootlets, and green sapling bark (pounded 
with a mallet) are a few plant materials that 
lend themselves to this. Cordage can also be 
made from animal products like sinew, raw-
hide, and hair.

• 

• 

Annuals such as milkweed, dogbane, stinging 
nettle, and hemp have a pithy center and 
strong fi bers that grow on the outside of the 
stalk. Harvesting the fi bers is done when the 
plant is dead in the fall but has not yet had the 
chance to start decomposing. I have harvested 
stalks in the winter and spring from still-
standing plants, but the fi bers were weak.
Good-quality fi ber can be found in the meaty 
leaves of yucca and agaves and in the bark of 
basswood (American linden), cedar, aspen, 
cottonwood, ash, hickory, tamarack, willow, 
and juniper. Fibers within this category can 
be harvested at any time yet require more 
work to gather and prepare.

HARVEST AND STOR AGE

Many fi brous annuals, including milkweed and 
dogbane, tend to grow in large patches and, once 
recognized, can easily be found during the sum-
mer and early fall when they are still alive and 
easy to distinguish from other similar plants. 
Harvest the dry, dead stalks in late fall by break-
ing them off at the ground and bundling them 
together for transport and storage. I prefer to har-
vest aft er the seeds have dispersed (or I sprinkle 
them myself) to ensure that the following year I 
am able to harvest in the same area. Keep the 
stalks in a dry place out of direct sunlight until 
you need them.

207

2 0 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Raw cordage materials

 
CO R DAG E A N D C R U D E C LOT H 

2 0 9

Basswood and yucca off er up their fi bers in 
diff erent ways. When you are harvesting yucca 
and agaves, carefully cut a few leaves from the 
base of the plant (the tips are very sharp). If you 
are traveling, wrap the cut ends in wet towels or 
paper and cover them with plastic. If you are 
going to work with the fi bers nearby, then they 
can remain uncovered.

Basswood trees can be found from eastern 
North Dakota south to eastern Texas and east to 
the Atlantic. Th e bark can be peeled easily from a 
live tree or branch, although it is easiest to do dur-
ing spring and fall when the sap is running. Large 
trees (eighteen inches or more in diameter) can 
have bark removed, apparently with no ill side 
eff ects. (I am not a tree surgeon, so please check 
with one prior to removing bark if you are con-
cerned about parasites or about adversely aff ect-
ing a given tree.) My rule of thumb is to take a 
piece no wider than one-quarter of the diameter 
of the tree; e.g., if you have a tree with a twenty-
four-inch diameter, you can take a six-inch-wide 
strip of bark.
 Cut the width of your intended strip horizon-
tally through the bark, then pry the cut section 
upward with a stick. Once you have enough bark 
freed from the tree, take hold of it with your 
hands and pull while walking backward from the 
tree. Th e strip will run up the trunk, getting nar-
rower as it climbs, until it tapers to a point and 
breaks. In general, the longer the strip, the better, 
as this will defi ne the length of the fi bers with 
which you will be working.

Prepping milkweed

thumb down one of the cracks until the stalk is 
lying with the inside up and open to the sky. 
Remember, the fi bers you seek are on the outside 
of the plant and now sit in your hand, facing the 
ground.
 With the stalk under your right arm, and your 
right palm supporting the plant, extend the open 
stalk three inches past your palm and break 
downward. Should you break upward, you may 
sever the fi bers. Pull off the woody portion. Th is 
should leave you with a papery, fi brous material, 
the skin still attached to the stalk. Extend the 
stalk another three inches beyond your hand and 
repeat. Once the stalk has been treated thus, rub 
the weak and wispy bit of “skin” between your 
hands until it feels soft er and the woody bits and 
outermost skin crack away. You’re now ready to 
spin the fi bers into cordage, as described later in 
this chapter.

Preparing Plants with External Fibers

Preparing Plants with Internal Fibers

Th e stems of annuals like milkweed or dogbane 
can be crushed with your fi ngers or between two 
hard objects. Th en open the stem by sliding your 

Th e fi bers of some plants, including yucca, are on 
the inside, and the meat of the plant must be 
crushed in order to access them.

 
 
 
210 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

 A smooth, round stone the size of a dinner 
plate near fl owing water is optimal for the task of 
extracting the fi bers from a yucca plant. You will 
also need a wrist-thick stick. Dip the yucca in the 
water and place it on the rock. Pound on it for 
about twenty strokes before dipping it in the water 
again. As you alternate between pounding and 
dipping, you will notice that you are making a 
frothy mess of natural soap on the rock and that 
all of the green meat of the plant is dissipating, 
revealing white fi bers. Soon, the fi bers are all that 
will remain. Th ese fi bers can be left attached to 
the very sharp point of the leaf and stored for later 
use, or you can cut all but three or so fi bers and 
use the pointed leaf tip as a natural needle and 
thread. Proceed to the section below on spinning 
the fi bers into cordage.

Basswood

Th ere are also fi ber-producing plants that keep 
the desired fi bers neither outside nor inside but 
just between the two. Some trees, including bass-
wood, keep the fi ber just inside the bark yet not in 
the meat of the tree.
 Aft er the bark has been harvested, as described 
above, it must be retted, or soaked—submerged in 
water. Soaking the bark in running water, such as 
a cold creek, will require a longer ret time (four to 
six weeks) than soaking it in a warm pond (two to 
four weeks). Th e soaking begins the breakdown 
process in the bark, which is made up of many 
layers of fi ne, paperlike material. Pieces left too 
long in the water are still useful, but the exposed 
layers may have rotted; plenty of good material 
may remain underneath them. Pounding the bark 
while dousing it with water will provide you with 
cordage material immediately.

Pull the retted bark from the water and peel 
up layers of fi bers. Stiff er sections can be pounded 
in a fashion similar to that of yucca (see above), or 
the bark can be left to ret longer. Th e fi bers are 
now ready to be worked into cordage.

SPINNING FIBERS INTO CORDAGE

Once the fi bers are prepared, they must be spun 
into cordage to be useful. Here are two methods.

1. Hold the fi bers near the middle of their 
length, with the thumb and forefi nger of 
each hand about four inches apart. Begin 
twisting the material by rolling it between 
your right thumb and forefinger while 
holding fi rmly with your left thumb and 
forefi nger.

2. Th is twisting will cause a loop or kink to 
form in the area between your hands. 
Grasp the loop or kink between the left 
thumb and forefi nger, letting both “bun-
dles” of fi ber hang down.

3. With your right thumb and forefinger, 
twist the strand on the right (strand A) 
counterclockwise, or away from you, then 
wrap the twisted strand A toward you, or 
clockwise, around strand B.

4. Releasing strand A, grasp strand B and 
repeat what you have just done with strand 
A. Th is method, while slow, will make for 
a tight and consistent string that is suitable 
for bows and snare lines.

 Th e second method is faster and is especially 
useful for rapid production of weaving materials 

 
 
 
 
 
 
or for making string that is not intended for heavy 
work.

1. Hold the fi bers near the middle in your left 
hand, and place them across your right 
thigh with the two strands separated by a 
few inches.

2. Place your right hand on the strands, with 
the pad of your middle fi nger on the for-
ward strand and the other strand just 
below it closer to your palm.

3. Slide your right hand forward, rolling 
both strands, still independent of each 
other, until the near strand reaches the 
base of your palm.

4. Now pull your hand back, bringing both 
strands together, where they will wind 
about one another. Grasp the strands 
where they meet, then repeat the process.

CO R DAG E A N D C R U D E C LOT H 

211

For bundles of long fi bers like basswood, one 
end can be attached to an object, and a large loop 
of thin cordage, placed at the center point, can be 
attached to another object, such as a tree.
 With the bundle forming a straight line from 
the anchored end through the loose loop, the free 
end is twisted until a kink is formed in the mid-
dle. Th en, while some tension is maintained, the 
free end is brought to the anchored end, which is 
freed. Both bundles are allowed to wrap around 
each other. Th e loose loop is untied and removed 
from the cordage.

SPLICING

Oft en, the fi bers used are not long enough to cre-
ate a rope of a usable length. Th erefore, you’ll 
need to splice in additional fi bers. Two techniques 
are commonly used, and I have found both 
satisfactory.

Making long cordage

Splicing

 
 
 
 
 
 
212 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

1. If both fi ber bundles below the spun cord-
age are of the same length, then a “full lay-
in” is an option. To clarify, when two 
inches or more of unspun fi bers are left 
remaining to be wrapped, a new fiber 
bundle is grasped at its center and placed 
with the center point at the last wrap. Th e 
new lengths are now wrapped along with 
the old ones. To avoid the bulge that the 
full “lay-in” leaves in the cordage, you can 
trim one of the unspun fiber bundles 
hanging below the cordage by fi ve inches, 
then proceed as described below.

2. If the fi ber bundles below the spun cord-
age are uneven, a splice is required. When 
two or more inches are left on one fi ber 
bundle, a new bundle is placed on the 
remaining two inches, and you continue 
to reverse-wrap once again.

 Th ere is no substitute for practice when you 
are making cordage. Your speed and quality will 
improve quickly once you have the basic concept 
down. Pay attention to how tightly or loosely you 
are wrapping, then note the quality. Too loose of a 
wrap will result in weak cordage, and too tight of 
a wrap will compromise the fl exibility and there-
fore the longevity of the cordage (tight fi bers rub-
bing hard against one another will weaken and 
break). Try for an even width, and don’t get dis-
couraged if it takes you ten or more feet to pro-
duce a nice section of cordage.

A

best suited to fi bers like basswood, which can be 
collected in long sections.

1. Lash a crosspiece that is two feet greater 
than the desired width of your blanket 
between two trees that are about three feet 
above the ground. This is the anchor 
piece.

2. If your fi ber length is ten feet, then lash 
two more crosspieces (guide supports) to 
saplings or posts that are nine feet away, 
one above the other, and parallel to the 
anchor. Th ese two should be at one foot 
and six feet off of the ground.

3. Attach horizontal guides every two to 
three inches to the vertical guide supports. 
Th ese are straight saplings or branches, 
one-half inch in diameter, that are placed 
vertically on the guide supports.

4. To attach the warp, tie fi ber bundles to the 
anchor, making sure that they are snug 
next to each other. I like to tie an even 
number of bundles. For this example, I’ll 
tie on twelve bundles.

5. From here on, I’ll call the bundles collec-
tively the “warp” and individually the 

B

C

WEAVING

A simple loom can be made for weaving long fi ber 
bundles into blankets or robes. Th is method is 

Loom

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CO R DAG E A N D C R U D E C LOT H 

213

B

1

A

2

C

Loom in use

“warp ends.” Run the warp ends from the 
anchor to the guides. Every other warp 
end is tied to a guide that is three feet 
above the ground. Th e others are passed 
between the guides and tied to a heddle 
stick, an unattached stick the width of the 
anchor. (In modern looms, the heddle is a 
frame of vertical wires that lift s and low-
ers the warp to allow interweaving of the 
weft or woof).

6. Th e weft is tied to one side of the anchor or 
an outer warp end and then fed between 
the stationary warp and the warp attached 
to the heddle stick.

7. Th e heddle stick is then raised up and held 
by Y sticks or hooks attached to the guide 
supports, and the weft is again passed 
between both warps.

8. When a weft runs short, add in another by 
overlapping the end of the last one by two 
warp ends.

9. As you progress, the weft may become 
uneven unless you manually snug each 
one up to the one previous to it.

 10. To leave an opening—for example, the 
head hole in a poncho—simply run the 
weft to the middle of the piece rather than 
all the way to the other side and then back 
to the edge. Let us say that you are work-
ing on a blanket with forty warps and you 
want to leave a slit in the middle for your 
head so as to allow the blanket to double 
as a poncho. Th e weft would run through 
the warp until the point at which you wish 
to have the slit. You now work the weft 
through twenty warps, and then, instead 
of continuing on, you turn around and 
take the weft back to the edge again. Th is 
is repeated until the desired length of the 
slit is reached, at which point you repeat 
the process with the other side taking the 
weft through twenty warps. Once the 
weft s on both sides of the slit are lined up 
again, you take the weft through all forty 
warps, edge to edge. You will have to do 
this from each side.

 
 
 
 
 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 6

OTHER TOO LS 
AND MATER IALS

The indigenous people of North America had 

fairly extensive tool kits to make their lives easier. 
Some tools, like digging sticks, were simple and 
are easy and quick to replicate. Others—including 
almost anything made of stone—require special 
skills and the use of other tools to make. For 
short-term survival, the time and skill needed to 
manufacture some of the more complex tools are 
better spent in other ways. However, for long-
term stays in the wild, such tools are invaluable, 
and the time used in craft ing them is time well 
spent.

WORKING WITH STONE

Flint knapping is an art, a highly specialized skill 
developed through many hours, lacerations, 
“almost masterpieces,” and loads of handmade, 
individually craft ed pieces of gravel. Not having 
grown up in areas rich in fl int or obsidian left me 
with little opportunity to play with making cut-
ting edges from such fabled materials. I did, how-
ever, forget my knife on many an impromptu 
fi shing excursion and needed to scrounge, not 

only for something with which to gut the fi sh but 
with which to make a bow drill or hand drill for 
cooking purposes. 
 A cutting edge has great value in wilderness 
living. Can you get by without one? Not for any 
extended period. In wilderness living, the need 
always arises to part or divide materials, to shape 
and adjust items. While some shelters can be 
made with no cutting edge, making fi re, process-
ing animals, fashioning most containers and 
clothing, as well as myriad other chores, cannot.
 Crude stonecutting implements are appealing 
because they are oft en easy to fi nd and simple to 
modify. Th e downside is that they don’t last as 
long as modern cutting edges, nor are they as ver-
satile. Th ey probably won’t tempt you to whittle a 
stick just for the heck of it.
 Many areas in North America have little great 
stone with which to work, so I would pick up what 
I could fi nd and literally take a crack at it.

1. Find stones that, when tapped together, 
make a high-pitched “clack.” (If you tap a 
piece of quartz against sandstone, you get 
a “thud.”) Creek beds, washes, and cuts 
are good places to look.

215

 
216 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Direction 
of blow

Stone-striking sequence

2. Grasp the stone to be worked in your non-
dominant hand, facing the stone up at an 
angle, and hold a hammer stone in your 
other hand. If the workpiece is too large to 
hold, place it on the ground or on another 
surface.

3. Strike downward onto the platform with 
the hammer stone and look at the fl akes.

Such fl akes are oft en adequate for gutting fi sh. 
Some rocks provide a razor-sharp, yet very brittle, 
edge that will break as you cut the fi sh. Others 
may break along seams within the rock, giving 
you a sharp, ninety-degree angle—not great, but 
sometimes serviceable. Still others break off 
rough and not sharp enough to complete any-
thing other than abrading work.

Experiment with the rock in your locale. Look 
for diff erent types of rock, or look in your local 
library for information on the geology of your 

Different cutting edges

area. Be creative and ask around. You might be 
surprised how many closet experts can be found 
once word gets out about your interest.

Stone Pecking

Pecking can produce simple yet very useful stone 
tools with little skill and a lot of patience. Pecking 
is simply hitting a soft er rock with another, some-
what harder rock. Tiny fragments of the soft er 
stone break off , and eventually you can form a 
bowl or a groove for holding an axe handle. Th is 
method is not quick but is well suited for rainy 
days around camp.
 Walking any streambed will illustrate how 
many kinds of rock are available for use in a given 
area. Some are very hard and work well for 
smashing bone to get the marrow or to make 
shards that can be made into spears or arrow-
heads. Some are soft like sandstone, which can be 
used to smooth handles or other articles. Some of 
the best rocks to use for bowls are soft stones like 
soapstone and alabaster, although I prefer the 
medium-grain sanding stones such as basalt, 
found in riverbeds and elsewhere all over the 
country. Not to be confused with sandstone, 
medium-grain sanding stones are hard enough to 
use as a bone- hammering stone yet are soft 
enough to be worked.

 
 
 
 
 
OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

217

Stone pecking 

 White quartz rock is hard enough to use as a 
hammer stone for working the rocks mentioned 
above. It is also easy to fi nd a piece that fi ts com-
fortably in your hand and has a fi ne enough tip to 
allow precise strikes. With such a hammer stone, 
tap on the rock that you have selected and there 
should be a little mark where each strike 
occurred.
 With your quartz hammer stone, tap other 
stones and listen to the sound. A dull sound 
comes from soft er rocks. A higher pitch is an 
indicator of a harder rock. Try chipping pieces off 
of various rocks. Th e fl akes may be sharp enough 
to use for small tasks. I’ll oft en use such fl akes for 
gutting fi sh.
 When you are selecting a stone for a hammer-
head or a bowl, look for rounded stones that have 
a slightly coarse feel to them. Look them over 
carefully for any variation in their appearance. 
Th ey should be uniform, with no lines or cracks, 
because these will likely be breaking points.

If you are making a bowl, start pecking away. 
Always work on a soft surface like your lap, your 
hand, or in sand. Otherwise, you will likely crack 
your piece. I love pecking. I fi nd a comfortable 
position, leaning against a tree in the sun or 
lounging in the foyer of my shelter while the rain 

Hafting a hammer 

pours down, and I’ll work for hours at a time. 
Tapping on my project becomes a meditation of 
sorts. It is my rhythm, matching that of my heart, 
and it is somehow soothing. Two or more people 
working projects at the same time will, in short 
order, all be pecking the same rhythm.
 Wetting the stone seems to make the work 
progress faster. Striking hard will, in all likeli-
hood, break your stone project. Th in-walled bowls 
are very tricky, not so much in the making, but in 
the keeping—they break easily. One to one and 
one-half inches thick is pretty good. Just remem-
ber to heat the bowl slowly and evenly or it will 
crack.

For a stone hammerhead, a groove can be 
pecked around the center of the stone. Th e groove 
is to receive a bent, wooden handle made in the 
same fashion as in tongs. (See the section “Tongs,” 
later in this chapter.) Additionally, a one-inch-
diameter branch or sapling, sixteen inches long, 

 
 
 
218 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

can be split all the way down its length, and the 
split sides of one end can be shaved down. Th ese 
can then be placed in the grooves on either side of 
the hammerhead with at least three inches 
extending above the hammerhead. Th e split sticks 
are then bound above and below the hammer-
head with wet rawhide (see Chapter 14).

Stone Lamps

In times not so long ago, man rose and set with the 
sun. Why get up two or three hours aft er fi rst light 
and go to sleep hours aft er dark? Th is practice 
required more work in keeping a source of light 
available, used often valuable fuel in colder 
months, and meant working in poorer light. With 
the advent of electric lighting, man could rise and 
sleep when he wanted. When the days get shorter 
as winter sets in, it is nice to have the option of 
staying up later and working on projects by fi re-
light, but when fuel must be conserved for poten-
tial rough times ahead, a better option is the oil 
lamp. Th is is a very simple system requiring a 
depression or reservoir in which fuel, in the form 
of rendered fat, can be held. A short wick of cord-
age, with one end in the fat-fi lled reservoir, is either 
placed in a trough leading up and out of the depres-
sion or pinched in a split, green twig (the “tender”), 
resting on the rim. About one inch of the wick is 
left protruding above the tender. When the wick is 
lit, it heats the oft en congealed fat and pulls it up 
the wick, where it burns and provides light.
 Th e lamp base may be made of stone, shell, or 
clay (see “Primitive Pottery” in Chapter 17).
 To make a stone lamp:

Stone lamp

2. Take a short section (three or four inches) 
of loosely made cordage, like basswood, 
cedar, cottonwood, or other tinder or 
cordage material, and dip it in the liquid 
or hard fat. With congealed fat, I put a 
glob on the tip of the cordage that I intend 
to light because it will drip down the wick 
as it burns.

3. Split the tip of a green twig (tender), and 
wedge the wick in it with the fl ame end 
protruding an inch. Th e tender can then 
be rested on the rim of the lamp.

4. Place a second tender nearby, or pinch the 
wick an inch below the fi rst tender. When 
the fl ame begins to sputter as it burns up 
the wick above the first tender, simply 
remove it and place it below the next one.

 Th ese lamps tend to burn quickly, although 
the tenders slow it down somewhat. Placing too 
much wick in the oil at one time can result in the 
fl ame getting past the tender and igniting the 
whole lot.

1. Place some fat in the reservoir; if you can 
warm it fi rst so that the wick can easily 
suck up some fuel up, do it.

I had read a book with information on wicks, 
and while I was testing diff erent kinds of wicks, I 
would see how oft en I was interrupted by the need 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to tend the light. A pinch or wad of cattail set 
down at the edge of the reservoir provides a very 
long-lasting light that needs little tending and is 
easily made and set up. Other materials that work 
to varying degrees are small chunks of punky 
wood and compressed pinches of tinder, from 
dust to fi bers, with additives such as cattail or 
milkweed down.
 Animal fat does produce black smoke, so keep 
ventilation in mind and don’t keep your head in 
the highest part of your shelter or you’ll have 
trouble breathing.

WORKING WITH PITCH

OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

219

• 

• 

Making buttons. Th is is simply a matter of 
tying a knot in a piece of cordage and dipping 
it in a pitch mix with a lot of ash. Build it up to 
the desired shape by adding daubs of pitch 
with a stick. While the pitch is still warm, it 
can be patted with a fl at stick into the desired 
shape.
Coating knife handles, wrapped in cordage, 
with pitch containing a high ash content.

In the applications covered here, pitch is used 
with a hardening agent, either white wood ash or 
ground charcoal. A high density of these agents 
hardens the pitch to a brittle state, and a lower 
density keeps the glue soft er and more fl exible.

Conifer pitch is a tremendous asset when you 
are living in the woods, and I collect it whenever 
the opportunity arises. It can be used as an 
adhesive or as a waterproof coating in applica-
tions such as:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Fixing (haft ing) stone or bone spearheads and 
arrowheads to their shafts (see “Hunting 
Weapons,” Chapter 12).
Waterproofi ng seams on canteens or canoes 
(see “Bark Canteens,” in Chapter 17).
Making engraved bone ornaments. These 
look great when charcoal or colored stone 
dust is mixed with the pitch and is then 
smeared into the engraving; this can be a brit-
tle mix.
Making temporary tattoos by drawing a 
design on your skin with small amounts of 
sun-warmed pine pitch and dusting it with 
charcoal or colored stone dust.
Securing knots or lashings that will not need 
to be untied.

Collecting Pitch

When I’m on a pitch-collecting mission, my 
tools of choice are a container and a stick that has 
been sharpened to a point at one end and a fl at, 
screwdriver-like point at the other. As I walk 
through the conifers, I look for branch breaks at 
the trunk as well as those farther out, and, with 
my stick, I prod the areas that are healing over on 
the trunk or that have burst bubbles in the bark. 
Looking up into trees for woodpecker holes, bro-
ken branches, and other wounds is a good way to 
locate a pitch cache. Creating a wound to provide 
sap is another option, although it is oft en unnec-
essary, as so much is available at old wounds.

Preparing and Using Pitch

Oft en pitch has impurities in it, such as tiny pieces 
of bark. Some of this should be removed while 
you are cooking it, although a low density of fi ne 
impurities does not seem to have a negative eff ect 
on the pitch when it is used as glue. I pick out the 

 
 
2 2 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

larger impurities by hand. If the concentration of 
fi ne impurities is too high, however, it will result 
in weak and brittle glue.
 Th e best way to work with pitch is to heat it 
slowly in a stone or pottery bowl until it has gen-
tly boiled. Have your projects—such as canteens, 
knives, spears, or arrows—ready to go. Add white 
ash to the pitch in small, measured amounts—up 
to 5 percent by volume at a time, keeping in mind 
that even with heavy amounts of ash (up to 50 
percent), the pitch will still be very workable when 
it is hot. Yet, when heat is removed, pitch will 
harden very quickly. Ground charcoal also works 
well—some say better than white ash.
 Depending on your intention, you may need 
the pitch to maintain some fl exibility. A case in 
point is the canteen. In my fi rst attempt, I used 
about a 50:50 pitch-ash mix, which became so 
brittle that gently squeezing my canteen caused 
the pitch to fl ake and chip off . Spears and arrows 
need to have stone or bone heads fi rmly affi xed, 
yet pitch that is too brittle will oft en shatter when 
the spear or arrow impacts anything hard, such 
as the ground or a tree.
 To prepare pitch for use:

1. Heat a stone bowl (see “Stone Pecking,” 
earlier in this chapter) slowly to avoid 
cracking.

2. Add the pitch. Remember, pitch is fl am-
mable, so keep some dirt or a lid handy to 
smother fl are-ups.

3. When the pitch is simmering, add some 
ash or charcoal in small quantities, up to 
about 5 percent at a time. Mix it in well.
4. Test the hardness by smearing some hot 
pitch onto a piece of cloth, leather, or a 
fl exible green twig. Let the pitch cool, then 
bend the substrate and see if the pitch 

fl akes off too easily. If it does, you likely 
have too much ash. If you can bend the 
cloth or twig over on itself, there is not 
enough ash.

If you are working with a smooth gluing sur-
face, you may need to score it prior to applying 
the pitch.

Pitched products that will have a lot of contact 
with hands or clothing need to be well coated 
with ash. If they are not, when they warm up from 
the sun, your hands, or the fi re, they will become 
sticky and might weaken. As a general rule, keep 
pitch products away from fire and other heat 
sources.

I recommend experimenting with plenty of 
caution. Hot pitch is like natural napalm. If it 
touches you, it will stick, and it will burn!

HAND TOOLS

Even the simplest of tools can greatly ease the task 
of eking out an existence in the wilderness. Do 
not underestimate the value of the stick and stone, 
worked or unworked. Both are stronger than your 
fi ngertips and fi ngernails and can prove invalu-
able in survival or subsistence living situations.

Digging Stick

A digging stick is a superb tool for all manner of 
tasks, from digging up edible roots to digging out 
a food-storage pit. Digging sticks are best made 
from a piece of green hardwood like beech or oak, 
although soft er wood will usually do the trick. 
Th e piece of wood should be one and one-fourth 
inches in diameter and twenty-four inches long. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

2 21

2. With a stone, carefully knock out the 
length of bone between the lines. To be pre-
cise with your strikes, hold a smaller stone 
or chisel stone in place with one hand, then 
strike with a larger stone in your other 
hand. You should now have a bone missing 
a strip from its longitudinal axis.

3. A little abrading work is required to 
smooth the edges. Th is is a rather tedious 
process but is worth it if you plan on tan-
ning many hides.

Digging sticks

One end can be carved or ground to a round point 
and the other to a flat, chisel-like point. Fire 
harden both ends (see “The Rabbit Stick,” in 
Chapter 12), and you are ready to dig.

T H E S TA K E S C R A P E R . Th e stake scraper is far sim-
pler to make and is well suited to removing fl esh 
and fat from a hide strung on a rack.

Scrapers

Scrapers for working hides can be tough to make. 
Th ere are two types, the broad scraper and the 
stake scraper.

T H E B R OA D S C R A P E R . Th e goal in making a broad 
scraper is to create a square edge. Th is can be 
done by removing much of one side of a straight 
leg bone from a deer or larger animal and sharp-
ening one edge to at least ninety degrees.

1. Score two parallel lines that are one inch 
or more apart for the length of the bone 
(not including the knobs at each end).

1. Starting with a straight leg bone from a 
deer or larger animal, score a diagonal line 
around one end to form a chisel-like tip.
2. Break the bone along the score line. Th is is 
tricky because scoring bone takes time, 
but the more you score, the more predict-
able the break will be. Impatience oft en 
leads to early attempts at breaking the 
bone and disappointing results. A well-
scored bone can be tapped on a rock cor-
ner or edge of a rock so that the score lines 

Broad scraper

Stake scraper 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 2 2 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

fall directly upon the stone and abrade it 
to remove any barbs that might damage 
the hide.

3. Once the stick is bent, tie one arm to the 
other while the tongs are opened about 
three or four inches.

3. Tie a loop of rawhide or cordage to the 
unworked end so that the loop can pass 
around your wrist and add support while 
you are working the hide.

Tongs

Tongs are used to pick up hot rocks when you are 
rock boiling, to pick up coals for coal burning, 
and to move hot food items in or out of the fi re. 
To make a pair of tongs:

1. Cut a straight branch that is twenty inches 
in length and about one-half inch in 
diameter.

2. In the middle of your stick, shave a four-
inch section on one side, thin enough so 
that you can bend the stick in half fully 
without breaking it. Th e shaved section 
acts as a spring, holding the tongs in the 
open position. To aid in the bending pro-
cess, submerge the shaved section in hot 
water or steam, then bend it slowly over a 
round, one-inch-diameter form or stick.

 A Y stick can be used for tongs to provide bet-
ter stability for lift ing rocks or food. Cut a three-
inch-long section of sapling a couple of inches in 
diameter, and bend the longer Y stick around it. 
Th e short piece reduces strain on the hinge area 
and helps the tongs last much longer.

Camp Vise

A simple locking pair of pliers is great for work-
ing on small projects such as projectile heads or 
bone hooks. To make a camp vise:

1. Cut a one-and-one-half-inch-diameter 
hardwood branch to a length of six inches.
2. Taper one end, and then split the branch 

in half lengthwise.

3. Pinch a one-fourth-inch-diameter branch 
between the two split pieces so that the 
ends stick out on either side at the middle.

4. Lash the quarter-inch branch in place.
5. Carve a wooden wedge, and you are ready 

to work.

6. Place your project in the tapered end of 
the vise, and then force the wedge into the 
other end, pinching and securely holding 
the workpiece.

Tong preparation, tongs, and tong variation 

Camp vise

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

2 2 3

Pump Drill

Th e pump drill allows the user to drill holes or 
create coals for fi re with relative ease.
 A spindle is rotated by means of downward 
pressure applied to a horizontal handle with a 
hole in the middle through which the spindle 
runs. Cordage attached at its midpoint to the top 
of the spindle has its ends tied to the handle ends. 
A counterbalance or fl ywheel is attached to the 
spindle below the lowest point that the pressure 
plate reaches to increase the spindle’s momentum. 
Tips can be interchangeable to allow the pump 
drill to be used for drilling or fi re making.

 Th e process begins by holding the pressure 
plate and rotating the spindle by hand to wind the 
cordage around the spindle. Applying downward 
pressure to the handle then causes the spindle to 
spin as the cordage unwinds, and the spindle’s 
momentum causes the cordage to rewrap around 
the spindle in the opposite direction, automati-
cally setting the device up for another downward 
thrust. Th e pressure plate is thus pumped contin-
uously, and the spindle spins in one direction, 
then the other, without a pause.

Pump drills can be of any size. The one 
described here is great for fi re making and is easy 
to put together.

Notch

Cordage

Spindle

Pressure plate

Wedge

Weights

The parts of the pump drill

Fire drill tip

 
 
2 24 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

1. Harvest or prepare the following 

components:
• 

A straight stick about two feet long, 
thumb or nickel size on the thick end, 
and fairly sturdy is needed for the spin-
dle. Green wood works best if you plan 
to attach tips for drilling or fi re making. 
If you want to make a fi re without add-
ing a fi re-making tip, you will need to 
use a good piece of dry wood like that 
used for the spindle of a bow drill (see 
Chapter 8).
Two sticks about eighteen inches in 
length and at least one inch in diameter. 
Th ese will make up the crosspiece or 
pressure plate. If you want a cleaner, 
tighter apparatus, a single piece of wood 
with a hole for the spindle drilled at the 
midpoint will work well. See the pump 
drill illustration.
One stick about twelve inches in length 
and at least two inches in diameter. Th is 
will be split lengthwise and hold the 
weights.
Two evenly weighted stones that are at 
least one pound each. Another option is 
to gather two lumps of clay to custom 
form your weights as described later in 
this chapter.
Two wooden spacers that are wider than 
the spindle by half. A two- or three-inch 
section of a dead branch will do the 
trick.
Wood for a fi reboard, if you will use the 
pump drill to make fi re (see Chapter 8).
Cordage (see Chapter 15).

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

2. Strip the bark from the spindle, and carve 
or abrade a notch in the thin end, which 
will be the top of the spindle. Th e notch 

needs to be deep enough to hold your 
cordage well.

3. Place the two eighteen-inch pieces for the 
pressure plate on the ground parallel to 
each other, with the spacers two inches 
apart in the middle between them. Th e 
spacers should be notched to help ensure 
secure binding.

4. Bind the longer pieces together at the ends 
and around the spacers, being careful to 
leave the two inches between them free of 
cordage.

5. Slide the spindle, thin-end fi rst, two-thirds 
of its length through the gap between the 
spacers.

6. Tie a length of cordage to one end of the 
pressure plate, run it up through the notch 
at the top of the spindle, then run it down 
to the other end of the pressure plate. Tie it 
off . (Adjustments will happen later.)

7. Attach the weights as described in the 
sidebar “Attaching Pump Drill Weights.”
8. If you are using a dry spindle for fi res, 
then you are ready to carve a point on the 
spindle.

9. Place the spindle tip in the socket of a fi re-
board and, resting a little weight on the 
pressure plate, rotate the spindle by hand 
until the cordage is all wound up.
 10. Apply downward force on the pressure 
plate and count the number of revolutions. 
(Having trouble? Make a mark on the 
spindle and count how many times it goes 
around.) If your count is over fi ve, chances 
are your setup is not as effi cient as it could 
be. Shorten the cordage to bring the revo-
lutions below fi ve and see how it changes.

 11. With a strong but gentle downward push 
on the pressure plate, the spindle should 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

2 2 5

Attaching Pump Drill Weights

There are three methods to attach weights to the 

and the weight bars. One fairly expedient 

spindle for the pump drill.

Weight options

Method 1

1. Split the twelve-inch stick. Attach the 

method is to ﬂ atten two sides of the spin-

dle where you wish to attach the weights. 

Use two twelve-inch-long, three-fourth-

inch-diameter branches as clamps. Lash 

the clamps ﬁ rmly to the spindle and the 

weight bar to the clamps.

Method 2

1. Hack out two eight-inch sections of heavy 

hardwood that is two and one-half inches 

in diameter. It may not be a lot of fun, but 

it makes for some good weights.

2. Flatten two sides of the spindle where you 

want the weights, then do the same to the 

balance point of the weights. Or, you can 

carve out notches that mirror the ﬂ at sec-

tion on the spindle.

3. Lash the two weights to the spindle.

Method 3
1.

If you have easily accessible clay, pick the 

weights by pinning them between the two 

bigger grit out of two ﬁ st-size lumps.

pieces and lashing them tightly together. 

2. Mold them into a compact shape like a 

The weights can be fairly close together 

block or sphere, and press the weight bar

or father apart. I usually separate them by 

into them or otherwise form them to make 

about six inches.

attaching them easy.

2. Attach the weight to the spindle. The goal 

3. Set the clay weights aside to dry.

is to have the weight securely fastened to 

4. Once they are dry, the weights can be 

the spindle so that it will move with it and 

brittle, depending on the quality of the 

not loosen and twist free. Chances are 

clay, but they should be serviceable. Fir-

high that your weights are wider than your 

ing such weights is tricky due to their 

spindle, which requires that spacers be 

thickness. (See “Primitive Pottery,” Chap-

inserted into the gap between the spindle 

ter 17.)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 26 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

spin smoothly around until it is com-
pletely unwound. As the pressure plate 
reaches the bottom, let up on the pressure, 
because this is when the weights kick in 
and wind it up again.

 12. More adjustments can be made and should 
be played with to get the most out of the 
pump drill. If it spins and lurches, you 
need to even out the weights either by add-
ing or subtracting material from one or 
moving one weight closer or farther from 
the spindle. Try a longer pressure plate, or 
move balanced weights closer to or farther 
away from the spindle. Experiment.

D I F F E R E N T P O I N T S . A sturdy joint must be created 
to allow the spindle to receive diff erent points for 
diff erent tasks. Th e most fi eld-expedient way is to 
cut the end of the spindle at a clean, forty-fi ve-
degree angle and to do the same to the tip that 
will be attached. Th e two are mated and bound 
tightly. I found that a smooth spinning drill will 

abide this method of joining a new tip far better 
than one that is out of balance.
 Another, somewhat more secure, joint can be 
made by cutting the forty-fi ve-degree angle, and 
then tapering it to make a wedge on an angle. Th e 
tip has a corresponding groove in its angled face, 
which helps in preventing the tip from skewing.
 You do not have to be a highly skilled fl int 
knapper to be able to produce rock shards that 
will be serviceable as tips for drilling. See “Work-
ing with Stone,” earlier in this chapter, for the 
basics. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Cut or abrade a notch in the spindle into 
which the stone tip will fi t.
Shave down the sides of the wooden tip along 
the notch enough so that the stone protrudes 
out beyond it a little.
Blunt the edges of the stone bit where it pro-
trudes from the side of the notch.
Insert the stone and lash it in place, reinforc-
ing it with pitch if you wish.

Pump drill point joints

Pump drill bits with stone

 
OT HER TO OL S AND M ATERIAL S 

2 27

Pump Drill Refi nements

A weight can be made out of a round cake of clay 

 For a longer-term, ﬁ ner-looking pump drill, the 

with a hole through it. Make the hole by sliding 

pressure plate can be split out of some straight-

your spindle through the clay to just below where 

grained sapling, as can the pieces to hold the 

you want the weight to sit. The clay shrinks as it 

weights. These are then bow-drilled through so 

dries, making the hole a little smaller. If you really 

that the spindle passes through them. In such a 

want a great weight setup, make a groove on the 

setup, tightening the weight bar to the spindle 

inside of the hole in the clay before it dries, and 

can be done with wedges tapped between the 

make a corresponding hole in the spindle. Once 

spindle and weight bar. Be sure to add wedges 

the weight is ﬁ red and put in place, it is prevented 

only where they will push against the end grain or 

from spinning freely by inserting a key into the 

you will likely split your wood.

two grooves that are lined up.

 
This page intentionally left blank 

C H A P T E R 1 7

CONTAINERS

The value of a container is oft en overlooked until 

you have none. How to carry, cook, or hold the 
items and foods that we need for survival with no 
container does not at fi rst glance appear to be a 
pressing question. Roasting is a fi ne way to cook 
many wild meals, but what about drinks and 
soupy meals? Containers are worth a lot, and 
knowing how to make them for whatever your 
needs is worth the time.

BASKETS

Baskets are useful for a variety of tasks, such as 
carrying fi rewood, catching fi sh, storing foods, 
and holding fruits, seeds, and water. Many mate-
rials are available to make baskets of all shapes 
and functions. They can be loosely or tightly 
woven, rigid, or pliable. Loosely woven baskets 
can be lined with grass, leaves, or hides so that 
small objects can be carried without the risk of 
loss through the holes. Skins can be draped in the 
basket for rock boiling or carrying water. Th ere 
are more basket types, weaves, shapes, and mate-
rials than I can cover, but here are two basic bas-
kets that can be adapted for many uses.

Basic Rootlet Basket

Any pine, oak, or hemlock tree has many fi ne 
roots just below the surface of the soil. Th e root-
lets are very fl exible, making for easy weaving. 
Th e real bonus is that, aft er a day or two, they dry 
and stiffen up, and the basket becomes fairly 
rigid.

1. By carefully working your hand into the 
dirt, you will fi nd in the fi rst half inch or 
so of soil roots as thick as sturdy shoelaces. 
Th ese can be dug and pulled up in three-
foot lengths (or more), and when a quan-
tity has been collected, the weaving can 
begin. Any time you fi nd exposed rootlets, 
as in the case of storm-downed trees, 
make a point of collecting a supply.

2. Place three two-foot-long rootlets parallel 
on the ground and three more perpendic-
ular to and on top of the fi rst three at their 
midpoints. Th is spot is called the “hub,” 
and the rootlets are called the “warps” or 
the spokes. The warps will be woven 
around by “woofs” of the same material.
3. Th is is the hardest part of making this 
basket. Place a rootlet under the bottom 

229

 
 
 
2 30 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Placing the warps

Adding the odd warp and starting the weft

set of three warps. Moving clockwise 
around the hub, weave the woof over the 
top set of three and under the bottom set 
of three for two complete circuits. Th is 
will hold the warps together for the next 
step. Add in an additional warp by weav-
ing it into the newly placed woof so that 
there are thirteen warps radiating out 
from the hub. An odd number is required 
so that the woof falls fi rst on one side of 
the warp and in the next circuit falls on 
the other side.

4. From here, it is just a matter of weaving 
around the hub by going over one warp 
and under the next with the woof. When a 
woof runs out, simply add another, mak-
ing sure that it overlaps for a few warps.
5. To fi nish off , stop weaving when about one 
and one-half inches of the warps remain 
extending above the woof. Bend each warp 

Spiraling up

over to the right, and insert it into the 
woof alongside the neighboring warp.

 
 
 
CO N TAIN ER S 

2 31

Burying the warp ends

Bark Baskets

Th e beauty of bark is that it folds like paper when 
it is fresh, then hardens as it dries. Birch, tulip 
poplar, cedar, white pine, and elm are some of the 
best barks of which I am aware. A fairly quick and 
functional bark basket is the “one-piece” or 
 “single-fold basket.” First, see “Bark Containers,” 
later in this chapter, for information on harvest-
ing and processing bark.

1. Spread out a piece of bark, cambium side 
(inside) up. Th e dimensions are not impor-
tant, but for the sake of clarity, I will use a 
piece that is ten inches wide by twenty 
inches long with the grain running along 
the twenty-inch axis. Draw a line across 
the center of the piece. Th e line marks the 
center of an ellipse, with the points ending 
just shy of the edges, as shown in the illus-
tration “Bark basket folding lines.” Th e 
wider you make the ellipse, the rounder 
the basket will be.

Bark basket folding lines

2. Score along the ellipse line no more than 
one-third of the way through the bark. 
You can make baskets with score marks 
on the outside when you are using bark 
that is more rigid, as in the case of rougher 

 
 
 
2 32 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

pine bark and elm. With more pliable 
barks, I oft en will not score the bark at all, 
because it seems to bend into the desired 
shape without the risk of compromising 
the fi bers.

3. Fold the bark on either side of the ellipse 
upward, allowing one piece to overlap the 
other by an inch.

4. Holes for stitching must be drilled or 
burned with either a hand or bow drill. 
(Either can be fi tted with a bone or stone 
tip for boring through, or you can simply 
use a thin, pointed spindle to burn 
through.) Making holes with an awl will 
oft en create a split. Th e placement of the 
holes depends on how you want to stitch 
the basket. Parallel holes, an inch from each 
edge, allow for a number of stitch patterns.

5. Th e rim piece is important in preventing 
splits from the top during regular use. 
Bore holes an inch from the top around 
the whole edge. Tie a knot or twig to the 
end of your stitching material (cordage, 
rootlets, sinew, etc.) to keep it from pass-
ing through the holes. Run your cordage 
from the inside out; come over the rim 
piece and top edge back into the basket 
and through the next hole. Continue until 
you have gone through the last hole. Th en, 
with the aid of a thin, blunt awl, push the 
cordage through the next hole from the 
outside in, and tie it off .

6. Adding a strap makes this basket far more 
useful. Th is can be done by threading a 
thong or cordage through the existing 
stitching on the sides and tying off .

Bark basket getting stitched

Bark basket with carry string

 
 
 
 
 
BARK CANTEENS

I used to walk all over the land near my childhood 
home, drinking from streams whenever I was 
thirsty. I was never made ill by these waters. With 
the prevalence of pollution today, however, water 
must often be boiled in order to purify it for 
drinking. Th is means that any hunting trip or 
hike is limited by your ability to go without, 
acquire, or carry drinking water with you. To 
carry purifi ed water from camp, you can make a 
pine bark canteen.

1. Strip an eight-by-ten-inch piece of smooth 
bark from a live white pine with the grain 
running the long way. (See “Bark Contain-
ers,” later in this chapter, for more on har-
vesting and processing bark.) Be sure to 
utilize all of the bark from the limb or tree 
you fell, or take a piece that doesn’t reach 
all the way around the tree.

2. Trim bark, as indicated by the pattern in 

the diagram.

CO N TAIN ER S 

2 33

3. Gently fold the bark, without creasing, as 

indicated.

Folded pattern

4. Carefully curl one side within the other.

Pattern of canteen on the tree

Canteen in a holding shape

 
 
 
 
 
2 3 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

5. Whittle a wood cork or stopper (make it 
round and slightly tapered so it will seal 
against the mouth of the canteen), and 
place it in the opening.

6. Lash with some remaining bark.

Lashed to dry

7. Let the canteen sit a day or two. Th is allows 
the bark to dry out a bit and “remember” 
the shape desired. Leave it where it will get 
copious amounts of smoke to discourage 
bark-dwelling parasites, which may drill 
holes in your unfi nished canteen. Many 
are oft en in the bark already but can be 
killed with a careful application of heat 
and smoke.

8. Once the canteen has dried, remove the 
lashing and score, scratch, or otherwise 
roughen the areas that overlap as well as 
those areas that are adjacent to the seams 
when they are closed. Th e score lines will 
help the pine pitch and ash mixture adhere 
(see “Working with Pitch,” Chapter 16).

Scored seam

 10. Attach a bit of cordage like you previously 
did for the lashings. This time, leave 
enough for a strap.

 11. Acorn caps or hickory nut halves are a 
nice touch and add further protection to 
the corners.

9. Apply pitch.

Finished canteen

 
 
 
 
 
 
 To ensure the durability of your canteen, do 
not let the canteen get too warm, because the 
pitch may become too soft, thus allowing the 
seams to split. No hot beverages! 
 Holes from insects can be plugged with a lit-
tle bit of pitch that has very little ash mixed in. 
Periodically, allow the canteen to dry out, put 
some coarse sand inside, and gently shake it to 
scour it out.

COOKING CONTAINERS

Myths are plentiful about possible cooking con-
tainers if metal ones are not available. When you 
are in the outdoors, four materials are available 
with which to make cooking containers.

• 

• 

• 

• 

Hide.
 Unfortunately, hide is not a durable 
cooking container and is good only for a max-
imum of fi ve to eight meals. It requires a suc-
cessful hunt and seems like a waste of time. 
Hides are not easy to come by.
 Stone cooking containers are time con-
Stone.
suming to make and hard to lug around. Your 
best stone option is a pothole in a stone river-
bank, if you can fi nd one. Even then, it needs 
to be cleaned and, during the cooking pro-
cess, the surrounding rock will absorb plenty 
of heat.
Clay is a good option, yet it requires a lot 
Clay. 
of work and extensive processing, and the 
results are not guaranteed. It is, however, an 
excellent choice for a long-term stay.
 Of the options listed, bark and 
Bark or wood.
wood are oft en the most accessible and are 
defi nitely the fastest choice.

CO N TAIN ER S 

2 35

Bark Containers

Of all the barks I have tried, the eastern white pine 
has proven to be the best by far. Others are birch, 
tulip poplar, cedar (eastern and western), and elm, 
but you should experiment with others. Birch 
bark was widely used because the bark could be 
harvested and dried in fl at sheets. When it was 
needed, it was merely heated to regain its pliabil-
ity. It also has a natural preservative in the bark.
 A suitable tree or branch for harvest is one 
that has smooth bark and can provide enough 
material in one piece for your project. Bark can be 
harvested from a live tree with little chance of 
killing it as long as you do not remove so much 
that you girdle the tree. Harvesting a whole tree 
and making a good many containers is also an 
option. When you are looking for a tree to har-
vest, it is a good idea to seek out one that makes 
ecological sense to remove. This would mean 
fi nding a tree that is either going to die in the next 
few years or one that is crowding out more desired 
plant species. A tree that is going to die could be 
one that will clearly be crowded out in the next 
few years or perhaps has begun to fall, toppled by 
heavy winds or stream-bank erosion. Whatever 
the case, look over the surrounding area, and 
think about how the removal of the tree will aff ect 
the area over the next few years. When it lets more 
light in to other plants, how will they respond? 
What would happen if the tree were left ? Would it 
survive? Th e goal in tree selection is to be as sure 
as you can that the tree’s removal is more benefi -
cial to the area than if it were left standing.

Some bark, such as that of cedars and elms, 
takes more care to bend. Th ese must be scored 
along the fold or bend lines. Scoring the outside is 
benefi cial for two reasons. First, the outside bark 

 
 
2 3 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

is oft en less fl exible and is liable to break or peel 
away from the inner layer, thus weakening it. Th is 
can lead to leaks. Second, the fl exible fi bers are on 
the inside of the bark, not on the rough outer por-
tion, and scoring on the inside cuts some of them 
and reduces the number of eff ective fi bers.
 On the other hand, scoring on the inside is 
more common, the idea being that the tough 
outer bark will protect the fold lines. Of all the 
books I’ve read mentioning bark containers, only 
one speaks of scoring the outside, and this was 
only in reference to an undated museum piece. 
Both ways seem to work well, so see which one 
suits your needs.

1. Fell the branch or tree.
2. Make cuts, and be sure to make them all 

the way through the bark.

3. Gently peel up one corner of the piece of 
bark with a knife or fi ngertip. Th en, with 
your fingers sliding up and down the 
straight cut, separate the bark from the 
log. If the bark is removed from a fresh-
cut tree or limb, it will come off easily and 
have the pliability of green hide.

Small strips of the inner bark of the pine work 
well for tying and stitching. Care must be taken 
when making holes for stitching. Due to the 

Cooking container

Cooking container pattern

 
 
 
 
 
straight grain of the bark, ripping is a threat. I use 
a small, blunt twig as an awl, twisting as I push it 
gently through the bark. When you are stitching 
and tying, do not cinch down too tightly, because 
tearing can result.
 Any container that can be folded from paper 
can be made with pine bark. Th e container will 
stiff en within a few days and can be used regu-
larly for both cooking by rock boiling, and eating. 
It is possible to cook directly on the coals once or 
maybe twice. Th e bark will burn to the waterline 
and will also burn off the outer bark, leaving a 
very thin, fragile layer.

Wood Containers

Finding a piece of wood suitable for making a 
bowl is a trick in itself. In the absence of a saw or 
an axe, large pieces of wood can be found and 
burned down to a workable size. Th is is done by 
slowly burning away unwanted material, fre-
quently removing it from the fi re and scraping 
away the charcoal to prevent your piece from 
cracking. If the process is rushed, large cracks can 
appear and ruin the project. Cracks are not always 
bad, however; sometimes they can be exploited by 
driving a wedge of stone or hardwood into them, 
then splitting the log in half and saving yourself 
time.
 Once a manageable piece is secured, it can be 
hollowed into a bowl by placing a small heap of 
hardwood coals on the area you wish to hollow 
out. By blowing soft ly on the heap, either with 
your mouth or through a hollow tube, the coals 
will burn into the wood. Blowing on the coals is 
optional when you are working with a small pile 
of them; however, if a breeze is blowing, make 
sure to turn your bowl now and then to avoid 
burning out one side. Periodically remove the 

CO N TAIN ER S 

2 37

coals and scrape out the charcoal. Add more coals 
and continue. If an area is becoming too thin, 
place sand, stone, or mud over the area to prevent 
further burning. If you see fl ames, dump the coals 
in the fi re pit and scrape the bowl. Flames indi-
cate too much heat and are a sure sign that cracks 
will soon appear if you don’t act quickly.

Spoons can be made in the same manner. 
Carve out a spoon blank—a piece of wood made 
to look roughly like a spoon—and place a single 
coal on the bowl section. Hold it in place with a 
stick and blow with long, slow breaths on the coal. 
Periodically dump the coal in the fi re pit and 
scrape out the charcoal. Use a blunt stick as a 
scraper to avoid scoring the inside of the project. 
A little sand placed in the bowl and rubbed 
around works well as sandpaper. Once you’re sat-
isfi ed with the bowl, fi nish carving the spoon to 
your liking.

PRIMITIVE POTTERY

Pottery as a primitive living tool is invaluable. 
Getting to the point where you are able to actually 
make serviceable pottery, however, is frustrating 
to say the least. If you want to learn how to make 
serviceable clay from the raw material you fi nd, 
be prepared for a lot of trial and error. While the 
process is gratifying, it is a challenge, because 
there is no recipe for preparing all clays. When I 
started, I read whatever I could get my hands on, 
went to workshops, and played with clay in its 
various forms. When I read accounts of people 
fi ring clay and protecting their pots with pot-
shards from unsuccessful fi rings, I scoff ed and 
thought, “I don’t have shards. I am not making 
shards, I’m making pots!” Make no mistake about 

 
 
2 3 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

it, you will make pot shards! Th ey are great teach-
ers and tools, so get used to having them around 
if you want to make pottery.
 Most skills seem to have a crux, a particularly 
tricky part—a back that must be broken or a knot 
that must be loosened—aft er which the rest seems 
to come more easily. Primitive pottery is diff erent 
in that it has many of these critical steps and each 
one must be nailed or all previous work on a given 
piece will be for naught. Th ese are: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

Finding good raw material
Getting the right temper
Getting the right mixture of clay and temper
Building an adequate pot capable of with-
standing primitive fi ring
Setting up and completing a primitive fi ring

By far the best way to learn about this art is to 
work with someone who has already built a good 
base of knowledge. Countless hours can be saved 
and much skill gained in this way. It is important 
to note that many potters, primitive and modern, 
have hard-and-fast rules that they follow with an 
almost religious zeal. Some of these rules apply to 
their area, their clay, and their fi ring technique. I 
have seen potters break strict rules of their peers 
and have great success. Keep an open mind and 
observe, take notes, and work off of what a pro-
cess tells you.
 Th e idea of trying to tackle everything at one 
time is daunting, which is why I recommend 
approaching it from one of a few fronts initially. 
Th en, you can begin working on the others, or, 
you can fi nd someone local who has already done 
some of the legwork. Here are two approaches 
that somewhat simplify the learning process by 
limiting the “primitive” component intially and 

making use of modern tools or techniques as a 
learning aid.

• 

• 

Working with purchased (low-fi re) clay, build 
pots of various sizes and designs, and fire 
them through a primitive technique covered 
later in this chapter. Th is allows you to focus 
on the building process while aff ording you 
the greatest chance of having a successful fi r-
ing. I have a very high success rate with such 
clays. Th e only real issues I have run into are 
with pieces that ended up nearer the fi re’s 
edge and did not receive adequate heat to give 
them the resilience hoped for in pottery. 
Although some people have told me that com-
mercial clay is inferior when it comes to prim-
itive fi rings, I have found that low-fi re clay 
stands up very well to primitive fi ring.
Working with clay that you have harvested 
and purifi ed, build pots of various sizes and 
designs, and fi re them in a conventional kiln. 
Converting raw clay into clay that can with-
stand the rigors of a primitive fi ring is tricky 
and time consuming. If you get good results 
from low firing in a kiln, then proceed to 
primitive fi ring techniques. I have taken clays 
from the land and had great luck making pots 
and bowls that I was unable to break with my 
hands. However, the evenness of heat and 
temperature reached is not something that 
you can attain as easily in the wild.

If you want to go whole-hog, be prepared to 
spend more time, because you are working in a 
situation in which every aspect is a variable. With 
purchased, low-fi re clay, you know that the clay is 
good, so if the pot breaks, it is most likely a prob-
lem related to either construction or fi ring. If you 

 
 
 
are using a kiln and the pot breaks, it must be a 
problem with building or clay. Problems with 
building are fairly easy to determine due to the 
nature of the breaks; i.e., the break is along a con-
struction line or seam in which one piece of clay 
was not adequately bonded to another. If you have 
access to a kiln, make some pots with commercial 
clay, fi re them in a kiln, and, if you are successful, 
use the same technique on self-gathered and puri-
fi ed clay.

I recommend reducing the number of vari-
ables with each fi ring to the fewest possible. Th is 
allows you to pinpoint the area needing the work. 
For me, it was the fi ring process that required the 
most tweaking. I have played with many clays, 
have known them to be good, and have broken 
pots in the fi ring.
 Th at all said, there is nothing to say that you 
can’t have a successful fi rst experience building 
and fi ring your pots.

Getting Clay

Looking at the landscape and trying to determine 
where clay is to be found can be baffl ing. Th ere 
are ways to minimize your search time. Looking 

Clay ﬁ eld-quality test

CO N TAIN ER S 

2 39

along streams and lakeshores is generally pretty 
good for a couple of reasons: (1) water likes to seep 
downward, so if it’s on the surface, it is there for a 
reason—one being bedrock beneath it, the other 
being clay; and (2) moving water cuts through the 
substrate on which it fl ows, and in so doing, it 
exposes diff erent layers of strata, some of which 
may be clay. I have found clay mixed thoroughly 
with rocks and gravel. I also have found clay of 
such purity that it needed only enough water 
added to make it workable. It comes in many col-
ors—reds, grays, purples, blues, browns, greens, 
and shades of white or cream. I have even played 
with black clay. Th eir raw color does not let the 
potter know, however, what color they will turn 
out to be when they are fi red. Most of the clays 
with which I regularly work fire from a light 
peach color to a dark red, rusty tone.
 Two clay quality tests that I have used to deter-
mine the plasticity of the raw material are as fol-
lows: Roll out a piece of damp clay to a uniform 
pencil thickness, and gently tie it in a knot. Do 
not try to cinch it down by pulling hard on the 
loose ends; just check it for cracking. If it holds 
together, it should be workable. Th e other test is 
to make a ring (roll some clay between your hands 
so it is half an inch thick, and form this into a ring 
with a two-inch diameter), set it on edge, and see 
how much the ring slumps. If you get little slump, 
you likely have some good, workable material.

Purifying

Getting the stones, from fi st size down to sand, 
and the organic matter out of the clay can be a 
relaxing yet time-consuming process. Th e satis-
faction I get when I have a good load of pure clay 
is almost pathetic; it’s worth every minute of 

 
 
24 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

work, although I am pretty miserly with it if I’ve 
done it with no modern aids. Th ere are generally 
two types of purifying techniques used, wet 
and dry.
 The dry purification is my least favorite 
because it is very labor intensive. It basically 
involves picking anything you don’t want out of 
the clay. Th is is aft er you have spread out wet clay, 
let it dry (unless you found dry chunks initially), 
and pounded it to dust with a stick. If you happen 
to have a large sheet or a bunch of large hides, you 
can winnow the clay by pummeling it to dust and 
gently tossing it up on the windward side of the 
sheets or hides. As the light clay is carried gently 
by the breeze to fall on your sheet, the sand falls 
straight down, and there you have your clay. 
Another option is to make a sieve with grasses 
bunched to form a crude basket. No thanks, I 
choose wet purifi cation.
 Wet purifi cation off ers a few choices. My pre-
ferred method is to:

1. Submerge wads of wet clay into a container 
of water (bark container, hide bag, pot-
hole, tarp or plastic bag, or bucket), and 
knead it until the clay particles separate 
and the heavier sand and gravel sink to the 
bottom, leaving the clay suspended in the 
water. Keep adding and kneading clay 
clumps until the water takes on a milk-
shake consistency and all of the clay is sus-
pended in the water.

2. Giving the mix a good stir, let it stand for 
about fi ft een to thirty seconds, and then 
gently pour the liquid out into another 
container, being careful not to upend the 
fi rst container. Th e goal is to leave one 
container with grit and the other with clay 

juice. If you have used a pothole, move 
on to steps 3 and 4 of the alternate wet- 
purifi cation method described below.
3. Using your fi ngers as strainers, run them 
through the liquid and pull out grasses 
and other organic matter.

4. Set the container aside and let the clay set-
tle out. As it does, there will be an increas-
ing layer of clear water on top; this can be 
removed with a dipper.

5. If you want to speed up this process (it can 
take about a week), the liquid mix can be 
poured through a porous material like a 
shirt. Another method is to pour a thin 
layer onto a blanket or a hide with the 
edges slightly raised. Th e increased sur-
face area will promote a short evaporation 
time.

6. At this point, the clay needs to be moni-
tored closely to ensure that it does not get 
too dry. If it does, all is not lost—merely let 
it dry completely, powder the clay, and 
move on to “Adding Temper,” below.

A LT E R N A T E W E T- P U R I F I C A T I O N M E T H O D . Here is 
another option for wet purifi cation of raw clay.

1. Follow step 1 in the previous method.
2. Let the clay settle out in its original con-
tainer. It will settle out slower (particles 
are smaller and lighter) than some of the 
other material like pebbles and small 
grains of sand and, therefore, make up the 
top layer of the material on the bottom of 
the container.

3. Remove the water with a dipper as the 
water above clears, or once the mixture is 
made, stir or agitate it in the container, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CO N TAIN ER S 

241

then pour it, water and all, into a hole dug 
in the ground. What will happen is that 
the settling out of materials from the water 
will happen in the ground rather than the 
container. Due to the porosity of the 
ground the water will soak in faster than 
the other methods mentioned in this 
chapter, allowing you to harvest the top 
layer of sediment in the hole sooner.

4. Scrape or scoop up the clay off of the top 
of the sludge at the bottom of the hole or 
container, being careful not to go too deep 
and reintegrating sand or gravel back into 
the clay. If you have any cloth or hide that 
is at least the size of the bottom of the con-
tainer, you can, aft er pouring the mixture 
in, let it sit for about thirty seconds, then 
place the cloth on the bottom. Th e clay 
will settle on the cloth, allowing less mate-
rial to disappear in amongst the gravel 
while also preventing any unwanted mate-
rial from getting mixed in with the clay.

Adding Temper

As clay is heated and cooled, not only in the fi ring 
process but also in subsequent uses, it expands 
and contracts. Because heat and cold are not 
applied evenly over the pot, one part expands or 
contracts faster than another part. Between these 
two parts, something has to give; therefore, a very 
smooth, temper-free clay will likely crack, while 
one with good temper will not appear to do so. 
Th is is because, instead of getting one large crack 
along an expansion or contraction border, many 
micro-cracks form between the pieces of temper, 
or a crack runs into a grain of sand, or a void, 
causing that crack to end or to take a diff erent 
direction. Th ese many cracks are oft en too small 
to see but provide enough fl exibility to keep the 
pot together. Issues can arise when the temper has 
moisture within it and explodes or feeds steam 
into the surrounding clay, causing it to spall off as 
the steam grows in volume until it can no longer 
be contained within the clay.

Temper and clay

 
 
242 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

 Temper is oft en fi ne sand, ground-up fi red pot 
shards (also called grog), ground-up egg- or sea-
shells, as well as organics like cattail or milkweed 
down. Organic materials burn up in the fi ring 
process, leaving voids that act as insulation. Grog 
seems to be the best, because it has already been 
fi red and is quite stable. To this end, I have fi red 
sand for this use. I have had fewer issues with 
spalling (the cracking and fl aking off of parts of 
the vessel wall during fi ring) when using it in 
forced drying (drying freshly made ware by direct 
application of heat) and subsequent fi rings. 
 Adding temper and determining how much 
and what to use can be tricky, and conducting 
tests using a variety of tempers in varying quanti-
ties is a good idea as you work on fi guring out 
your local clay. For my initial use of clay, I make 
four mixes. Using either fi ne sand or ground-up, 
fi red pot shards (grog), I’ll make one batch three 
parts clay and one part temper (3:1, or 25 percent), 
one 4:1 (20 percent), another 7:1 (12.5 percent), 
and the last batch will have no temper added. I 
have found that some situations (e.g., with par-
ticular clays or less careful fi rings) require a ratio 
greater than 3:1 (25 percent) temper and have 
heard of people using a 50:50 mix, but I have not 
used such a temper-rich clay myself. As the 
amount of temper increases, it becomes readily 
apparent that the workability of the clay dimin-
ishes; i.e., it cracks and dries faster. Th is can be 
remedied to some extent by either presoaking 
your temper (especially if you are using grog) if 
you are adding it to already wet clay, or, if you are 
adding the temper to a dry mix, you can let the 
clay age once water has been added. I’ll oft en add 
more water than necessary, mix the clay well, and 
let it dry to a workable consistency over a few days 
at the least.

 To add temper to dry, powdered clay, use a 
container (gourd, cup, etc.) as a measure, and mix 
it thoroughly before adding water (or add the pul-
verized, dry clay to the water while you swirl it 
about; this prevents serious clumping). As you 
add water, give the clay time to soak it in, and 
then knead the clay well, adding water as needed. 
Th e clay can benefi t from aging—being allowed 
to sit and really soak up all of the water it needs—
although the jury is still out on whether doing 
this for extended periods (weeks or months) is 
necessary.
 To add temper wet, measure out both clay and 
temper either by packing it into a measuring con-
tainer or, better yet, make a uniform disk, cut out 
the desired piece of pie, and replace it with 
temper.

I like to then ball up the clay, leaving the tem-
per on the work surface, and roll the clay through 
it. Temper will adhere to the outside of the clay 
and can then be kneaded and wedged in. To 
wedge clay is to forcefully throw it onto your work 
surface, not randomly, but carefully so as to main-
tain the clay in a lump and not let it become a 
pancake. Wedging not only helps to integrate the 
temper, it also removes air pockets in which the 
trapped air expands during fi ring, causing spall-
ing (the fl aking off of sections of your pot).

Building Pots

Th e building of a pot can be explained fairly sim-
ply, yet there is lots of room for improving to a 
high level of profi ciency and beauty. Two simple 
pot types are the pinch pot, good for smaller 
objects like eating bowls, lamps, and ladle bowls, 
and the coil method, used for larger objects such 
as cooking containers, water jugs, and the like. 

 
 
Flat-bottomed vessels work well where there are 
fl at work surfaces such as tables, but these can be 
rare in the natural landscape. Flat-bottom pottery 
is also diffi cult to heat evenly over a fi re. For both 
reasons, I have found it to be more prone to break-
age than pots with rounded or conical bases. Th e 
rounded or cone base allows a pot to be nestled 
into the coals or easily supported between three 
or four rocks placed in the cooking fi re.

In the construction of clay products, strength 
of the finished item is important, because it 
speaks to the length of time it may be suitable for 
use. To this end, you should know that the fewer 
places in which two pieces of clay are joined, the 
better. Poorly made joints are prone to cracking 
throughout the life of the pot from the moment it 
is made. Clay to be joined should be moist enough 
to stick together once modest pressure has been 
applied to both pieces. Th e most common issue in 
my experience is when one or both pieces are too 
dry. Th e solution is to score (scratch little lines) in 
a crisscross pattern on both surfaces to be joined 
and then run a wet fi nger over them. Pressing 
both pieces firmly together usually creates a 
dependable bond. Th is situation also illustrates 
the value of a pot molded from one lump of clay. 
Th ere are no joints.

P I N C H P O T M E T H O D. Pinch pots are exactly that—
vessels whose shape is pinched out of the initial 
ball of clay.

1. Form a sphere with your prepared clay.
2. Plunge your thumb into the sphere deep 
enough so that the tip comes within one-
fourth inch of going through the far side.
3. With your thumb in the hole and your 
 fingers outside, pinch them together, 

CO N TAIN ER S 

243

squeezing the clay to about one-fourth-
inch thick.

4. Continue pinching in this fashion as you 
rotate the sphere so that your “pinchings” 
spiral up and around from the initial 
pinch to the lip of the pot.

5. Go over the pot and focus on acquiring an 
even thickness. Squeeze or smear lumps 
into depressions or into the surrounding 
body of the pot. Don’t worry about dress-
ing up the lip at this point; this can wait 
until later.

6. Set the pot aside to dry out of direct sun-
light and not too close to a heat source. It 
should dry slowly and evenly.

7. Before it gets bone dry, it goes through a 
“leather hard” stage. It still has the darker 
look of wet clay, yet it has lost its malleable 
quality. Th is is a good time to trim the lip 
and scrape down thick areas with a shell, a 
wooden or bone knife, or any other tool 
you have for the task. Th is hardness is also 
the time to burnish, a process in which all 
of the clay particles are aligned, resulting 
in a very shiny surface. Th e burnishing 
process requires a smooth stone, pebble, 
or piece of polished bone that is large 
enough to hold in your hand but not so big 
as to be cumbersome. (In modern pottery 
shops, the backs of spoons and kitchen 
cabinet knobs are oft en used.) Sliding the 
smooth pebble over the leather-hard clay 
leaves a noticeably glossy trail in its wake. 
Whether you choose to burnish with no 
pattern, horizontally, laterally, or diago-
nally is up to you, but be careful around 
the lip, and don’t push too hard. It would 
be a pity to break your pot at this point. If 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Making a pinch pot

 
you want a really fi ne fi nish, burnish the 
pot when it has gone just beyond the hard-
ness of leather, then let it dry completely. 
Dampen small areas at a time with a rag 
or brush, and burnish it once again.

Burnishing, however, is far from essen-
tial. Many old pots and shards that I have 
seen either in the fi eld or museums have a 
rough or textured outer surface. Specula-
tion on the rationale for this is that the 
increased surface area promotes a faster 
heating of the contents when the pot is 
over a fi re. I like the texture on some pots, 
not only for the beauty it adds, but also for 
the increased grip you have while han-
dling these pots when they are hot, either 
with mitts or more oft en with sticks.

CO I L CO N S T RU C T I O N . Th e coil construction method 
allows potters to build larger pots than the pinch 
pot method. Within this method are many tech-
niques for building a jug, vase, or cooking pot. 
Here is one with some variations:

1. Begin with a pinch pot, but not one that is 
as thin as that described above (material 
can always be scraped away later).

2. Roll clay between your hands to create 
“ropes” of clay; these can be left round or 
be fl attened slightly.

3. Coil the ropes onto the top edge of the pot. 
If you wish the pot to widen, place the 
ropes more to the outer edge; to narrow 
the pot, place them more to the inner 
edge.

4. If the lip of the pot is on the drier side (the 
new clay does not readily stick to it), score 
and dampen it with a wet fi nger prior to 
applying the new clay. To slow the drying 

CO N TAIN ER S 

245

Narrowing coils

Smearing coils

process, you can cover the lip or top edge 
with damp leaves. If the pot is too moist 
and the clay wants to slump, allow it to dry 
somewhat before you add more clay.

 
 
 
 
 
 
24 6 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

5. Aft er you add a few layers, the new coils 
must be smeared, or feathered, into the 
pot below. I oft en smear the coils down-
ward on the inside of the pot and upward 
on the outside. Th is helps to maintain an 
even wall thickness. Always maintain a 
supporting hand or fi nger on the opposite 
side of the wall on which you are 
working.

6. It is a good idea to fi nish the inside of pots 
as you build them, because access to the 
inside can be tough once the pot is com-
pleted. I also try to imagine what would 
happen if I fi lled the pot with oatmeal and 
then tried to clean it. Is the interior smooth 
enough to allow for a good cleaning, or are 
there lots of little holes and knobs that will 
catch and hold food?

7. You may burnish the surface as described 
above, under “Pinch Pot Method.” Or, 
while the clay is still wet, you may texture 
the outside of the pot with a paddle, which 
can be wrapped with cordage. You can 
etch a design in when the clay is closer to 
being dry.

Prefiring

Th e goal in preparing ware for fi ring is to get it as 
dry as possible while preventing cracking. Th is 
usually means letting it dry slowly at fi rst. When I 
am drying ware and it is very hot, I will place a 
large leaf or two over the pieces to slow the initial 
drying. If you have a cloth or a piece of plastic, it 
can be draped over your work (the cloth should 
start out slightly damp) instead. On the other 
hand, if your ware has an even thickness and is 
on the thinner side, you may have success force 

drying pieces near a fi re or between two fi res. Th e 
air should be warm but not hot, and nothing in 
the vicinity of the pot should become too hot to 
touch. With the fi re on one side, the ware requires 
constant attention, and even then it is not always 
enough and pots can be lost.

Firing

When you are going to conduct a firing, it is 
important to have all of your ducks in row. In a 
perfect world, the pots are placed near a fi re, and 
the temperature is slowly brought up until the 
pots become too hot to handle with your bare 
hands. Th ey turn dark as the organic matter in 
the clay is burned up. Th e ware is then covered 
with wood, which is left to burn down to ash. Th e 
ash is brushed off , and the fi nished pots are taken 
out, blown clean, and held up for townspeople to 
marvel at, awed by your masterful craft smanship. 
You are then welcomed in every home as an hon-
ored guest . . . as I said, in a perfect world.

Let’s take it step by step.

1. Create a twelve-inch-deep pit by excavat-
ing it out of the ground, building up a 
berm, or using a combination of both. Th e 
overall shape does not matter, but the size 
should be large enough to accommodate 
your ware in the center and still have a fi re 
in the pit anywhere around the periphery 
without danger of the fl ames hitting the 
pots. Th e site should be located in an area 
that is sheltered from the wind.

2. Collect plenty of fi rewood, including a lot 
of kindling. Small hardwood sticks get a 
great fi re going and produce good coals; 
soft wood kindling can really crank up the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CO N TAIN ER S 

247

Pit ﬁ re setup

Pit ﬁ re setup with ware in place

heat, but you will need much more of it in 
order to keep the fi re going long enough. 
Have a few heft ier logs handy. I prefer to 
have more wood than I’ll need just to be 
on the safe side.

3. Make a fi re in the middle of the pit, and let 
it burn down to coals. Th is fi re should 
have some heft ier logs in it, although not 
all wood needs to be reduced to coals. 
While the fi re burns, preheat your pots by 
leaving them close enough to become 
warm, and rotate them to promote even 
heating.

4. When the ground has been dried and 
heated, rake the coals from the center, cre-
ating a ring of coals.

5. Place either green-wood sticks or previ-
ously fi red stones in the cleared area such 
that the ware can be rested on them 
(upside down) without touching the 
ground.

6. Place your pots on the rocks or rests, and 

let them heat slowly.

7. Add sticks as necessary to the coal ring. 
Slowly let the fi re creep in, bringing up the 
temperature in the ware, but do not let the 
fl ames touch the ware. Eventually (one to 
three hours, depending on your experi-
ence and a million other things), the clay 
will darken as the organic matter within 
the clay is burned (some people call this 
“smoking”). Th is darkening indicates that 
the pots are ready for direct, even heat. 
Another test that some potters use and 
one that I have adopted is the spit or water 
test. If spit or water bounces off of the hot 
ware, the pottery is ready; if it sits and siz-
zles, it is not.

8. Quickly and carefully stack wood around 
the pots until they are well covered. Use 
smaller wood and kindling, and add larger 
stock on top. At this point, fl ames may 
touch the ware.

9. Let the fi re burn for about two hours, then 
let it die down. Some clays are able to han-
dle thermal shock much better than oth-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ers. I have heard of pots being taken from 
the coals and put into a bucket of water 
and faring fi ne, while others break when a 
wind pops up and cools one side too fast. 
Th e choice is yours.

 10. If you see a crack in your pot, it may not be 
the end of the road for it. Some pots have 
been used for years with a crack that 
formed during fi ring. Dry goods can be 
kept in the pot, or the pot can be sealed 
with pitch. Cooking in it may make the 
crack run and, sooner or later, end the 
pot’s life.

 Many sources that I researched when learning 
about pottery referred to cow dung as the fuel of 
choice. Not everyone has cow dung available to 
them, so in searching for substitutes, I tried 
punky wood as a fuel in the following way:

24 8 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Pit ﬁ re, ﬁ nished ware

Punky wood rock kiln

 
CO N TAIN ER S 

249

1. Th e “kiln” can be a simple pit or, better 
yet, fi red stone held with a mixture of raw 
clay and dried grass with one-fourth to 
one-half-inch gaps throughout. A third 
option is a loose pile of stones (preferably 
prefi red) with a void or pit in the middle 
(the size of the pit is determined by the 
amount of ware you intend to fi re).

green-wood faggots, and slabs of bark are 
some of the options.

6. Let the fi re burn down until the pots have 
cooled completely. Sometimes this can 
take about twelve hours, but it depends on 
how much air is able to get to the burning 
fuel.

7. Remove the pots and rinse them with 

2. Put down a four-inch layer of dry, punky 

water.

wood on the bottom of the “kiln.”

3. Fill and cover the ware completely with 

fuel.

4. Cover the surface of the fuel completely 
with very fl ammable materials like wood 
shavings, dried grasses, and tinder—fuels 
that ignite easily and will get the whole 
surface burning evenly downward.

5. Once the punky wood is burning, cover 
the pit with a rock slab that can span it or 
other materials that will reduce the 
amount of oxygen available to the surface. 
Bundles of green grasses, prebundled 

Punky wood rock kiln, ﬁ nished ware

If you want to add some color or character to 
your ware, the fi re can be smothered with earth 
or debris when it has reached maximum heat and 
left to cool about three or four hours. Th is pre-
vents the pots from re-oxidizing and oft en pro-
duces some pretty neat eff ects. If you are intent on 
cooking with your pot, don’t bother making it too 
pretty, because it soon turns black from use. Also, 
don’t plan on making any family heirlooms, 
because the life expectancy for ware such as this 
is not too impressive.

Kilns

A rudimentary kiln requires some work but can 
greatly enhance your ware quality as well as your 
success rate. Th e following are two simple kilns.

D U A L F I R E B OX K I L N . Th e dual fi rebox kiln is built 
using your local clay mixed with grasses.

1. Harvest a few armloads of vegetation like 
grasses, goldenrod, sticks, and/or logs.
2. Place them on the ground at your kiln site 
so that they form a long, rounded mound 
about twelve inches high and fi ve feet long. 
If you have found a straight, smooth log or 
are using sticks, make sure to fully fi ll all 
larger voids in the pile and cover all wood 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 5 0 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Cutaway view of kiln

with grasses or leaves as a gasket to ease 
removal once the kiln is dry.

lowest pot while allowing heat to get under 
the ware.

3. Cover the mound with a 50:50 mixture of 
clay and grasses. Leave both ends open 
and a circle in the middle of the top. Th is 
hole is where the chimney will be and 
where the objects will be fi red.

4. Using the coil technique, build the chim-

ney up from the central hole.

5. In the edge of the central hole and in the 
wall of the chimney, pottery shards and/or 
prefired stones should be embedded. 
Allow them to jut out in a way that will 
allow the ware to be rested on them. More 
large, prefi red rocks will sit on the ground 
below the chimney opening to support the 

6. Let the kiln dry. Grasses can be tossed 
over it to retard the drying process and 
prevent cracking.

7. Once the kiln is dry, the grasses making 
up the form can be pulled out, freeing up 
any wood that was used in the process.
8. To fi re this kiln, place preheated ware in 
the lower chimney and light fi res in both 
open ends. Start them small, and slowly 
increase the heat, being careful to keep 
both fi res burning at the same rate. Flames 
rising out of the chimney eighteen inches 
or more is a good thing and something 
that you want to maintain for about an 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CO N TAIN ER S 

2 51

Cutaway of kiln

hour and a half before letting the fi re die 
down and the ware cool.

sturdy enough to accommodate your 
ware.

I have heard of people wet-fi ring (fi ring the 
kiln while the material used to make it is still wet) 
this type of kiln with no real cracking. Because it 
is dried from the inside out, water is able to leave 
through the moist, outer surface.

D O U B L E P I T K I L N . Th is kiln requires more experi-
mentation but has great promise and is used in 
large scale in parts of Africa. As with any primi-
tive fi ring method, the kiln master must pay close 
attention to the process and make adjustments 
while learning all the nuances of operating that 
particular type of kiln. It may not be rocket sci-
ence, but it is no walk in the park either.

1. With previously fi red stones (from a sweat 
lodge or done expressly for this purpose), 
build an enclosure or box that is large and 

2. Build a ring of stone or other type of 
reflector around the firing box but far 
enough away so that the fi re can burn in 
the “moat”—the area between the refl ec-
tor and the fi ring box.

3. Burn a small fi re in the box and in the 
moat to preheat the stones, and warm the 
pots as you do so. Leave a section that has 
no fi re in the moat or the heat may prevent 
you from getting your ware in the fi ring 
box.

4. Load the box with your ware, resting it on 
stones to keep it off of the ground, and 
block any side door with stones.

5. Spread coals around the entire moat and 
add kindling to further heat the pots.
6. Because the fi ring box helps to even out 
the heat, ware of an even thickness should 
be able to reach temperature fast with no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 52 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

ill eff ects. I do recommend getting your 
pots very hot (smoked) before moving on 
to step 7, however. It is tough to know 
when this point is reached if the ware is 
not visible.

7. Place wood all over and around the kiln.
8. Fire it up and keep it burning for about an 

hour and a half.

9. Let it cool, and carefully remove any door 

stones.

Pottery Use and Care

Pots fi red without glaze are porous and will sweat 
if they are fi lled with water. Th e advantage of the 
sweating is that, in the heat of summer, water in 
these vessels will remain cold as the moisture on 
the outside evaporates. I used sweating water con-
tainers in Australia, and even when the tempera-
ture had been more than 120°F, the water 
contained within them was refreshingly cool (a 
container was oft en hung on the porch, getting 
some sun). If you wish to cook in the pot, cook 

some porridge in it fi rst, because this will help 
clog the pores and reduce sweating, although any 
cooking in it will eventually do the same thing.

Some pots can handle getting put in the fi re 
and rapidly brought to cooking heat, and others 
cannot.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Take the time to preheat the pot before cook-
ing. If you want to really see what the pot can 
withstand, put it through its paces and see 
how it fares.
I suggest fi lling a room-temperature pot with 
room-temperature water. Most ware, in my 
experience, does not do well with thermal 
shock, like that caused by pouring hot water 
into a cold pot.
Building a blazing fi re around a partially fi lled 
pot may result in cracking at the waterline, 
because the clay above heats quickly while the 
clay below heats more slowly.
Stir your food regularly as it cooks, and clean 
it before the food residue has dried onto it.
Package your ware carefully for travel.

 
 
 
 
 
C H A P T E R 1 8

COMFORT AND 
CLE ANLINESS

Comfort is not a frivolous pursuit in the wil-

• 

derness. Especially during an extended wilder-
ness sojourn, certain amenities greatly 
contribute to the eff ective performance of tasks 
and help you remain physically and mentally 
healthy. Because wilderness living takes a lot of 
eff ort, compared to living in society, a certain 
level of comfort seems to be virtually essential to 
maintain a good attitude. If you’re feeling miser-
able, you’re probably doing something wrong, 
and you should ask yourself why you’re doing it 
at all. 

CAMP LAYOUT

Th e layout of your camp is important for general 
comfort, effi ciency, and health.

• 

• 

Make sure that your latrine area is downhill 
from your camp and well away from any water 
source to avoid contamination.
Having your food storage and cooking areas 
separate, clean, and away from your sleeping 
quarters is a good way to avoid animal visitors 
both large and small.

A common mistake among camping parties 
is gathering fi rewood and food that are close 
to camp, slowly depleting their closest sup-
plies. Keeping a buff er zone—an area sur-
rounding your camp in which you don’t 
harvest food or fi rewood—is a precaution that 
can save your life. In the event of an injury, 
heavy snows, or other factors inhibiting move-
ment, you will have a good supply of materials 
and food nearby.

Grass Mats

Grass mats can be comfortable and can help you 
sleep in a warmer environment by insulating your 
body from the ground. Loose grass is not bad to 
sleep on, but there is something quite nice about a 
fi rm, yet soft , mattress to sleep on. It has been my 
experience that loose bedding can take some get-
ting used to but soon fi rms up. If that is not your 
bag, make a grass mat. Th ey are simply made as 
follows:

1. Gather an armload of grasses; these can 
be cut with almost any cutting edge. I have 
used lower jaws of deer, serrated wooden 
and bone knives, as well as steel.

253

 
2 5 4 

BE YO ND SURVIVAL

Grass mat lashing

2. Divide the grass into equal-size bundles 
that are at least the diameter of your palm, 
and place them on the ground with the 
bundles parallel one another.

3. Lash the bundles tightly together, as shown 
in the illustration “Grass mat lashing.”

If the mats are to be stationary, the cordage 
can be of a lesser quality, such as cattail, grass, 
etc., rather than milkweed, basswood, yucca, net-
tle, and the like.

Backrests

When you are working on projects around camp, 
it is oft en nice to lean back against a tree or rock; 
however, with minimal eff ort and materials, a 
custom backrest can be made in little time.

Backrest detail

1. Find three sturdy saplings, branches, or 
dead wood pieces that are at least three 
feet tall and an armload of branches that 
are the thickness of your thumb.

2. Place the three structural pieces on the 

ground, parallel and close together.

3. Wrap cordage around one end of the 

pieces at least ten times.

4. Wrap cordage around the initial lashing 
between each piece and cinch it down.
5. Stand the three pieces up, with the lashing 
topmost, and pull the base of the middle 
stick away from between the outer two. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You should now have a freestanding 
tripod.

6. Lash the thumb-thick branches to the two 
outermost sticks; this is easier to do when 
the backrest is lying on the ground.

7. Stand it up and lean back.

Sometimes you may fi nd it necessary to tie 
one or more of the legs to an anchor peg or pro-
truding root. A grass mat draped over the back-
rest with enough extra length to provide a cushion 
to sit on completes the backwoods recliner.

HYGIENE

Keeping clean and healthy in the wild is not as 
tough as it might seem. Once your diet of natural 
foods has pushed out all of the toxins and other 
superprocessed food of society, you will fi nd that 
your body odor and oily hair fade away and 
plaque appears less on your teeth.

Defecating

Th is is a tender subject for many people, yet an 
important one. Many nervous poopers have 
refused to give in to the urge due to their lack of 
comfort with primitive toiletries. Holding a bowel 
movement back results in constipation and, if not 
tended to, can lead to impaction, a condition 
requiring medical attention. It is liberating indeed 
to walk into the woods and know that, at any 
time, in any environment, you can drop your 
trousers and comfortably take care of business. 
With that in mind, most public lands have strict 
guidelines concerning this very subject, so be sure 
that you familiarize yourself with local protocols.

COM F O R T A N D C L E A N L I N E SS 

2 55

 Most people who defecate in the woods will 
dig a six-inch hole, complete their business, fi ll it 
in, and cover it with a rock. Aft er years of poop-
ing in the woods, I have come to the conclusion 
that leaving poop on the surface allows it to dis-
appear far faster than if you put in the ground, 
given that store-bought toilet paper is not used. 
Additionally, if poop is visible, you are less likely 
to step in it; if it is cleverly “buried” under two 
inches of soil, you end up with something akin to 
a minefi eld and will develop a fear of picking up 
rocks. When you are in areas that receive few 
visitors, and you leave your poop on the surface, 
defecate in out-of-the-way places where people 
are not likely to go, such as thickets, next to 
thornbushes, and the like. In dry and/or hot cli-
mates, spreading or smearing your excrement 
will speed drying time, thus making it unappeal-
ing to fl ies.
 Th e following are eight ways in which to wipe 
yourself. Th e position you use can minimize the 
need for extensive wiping, so it is best to poop in a 
squat. It helps in voiding the bowels, as well as in 
spreading your buttocks, keeping them safely out 
of harm’s way. Sitting over a log, straight or 
forked, is more comfortable for some, while oth-
ers prefer to partially squat while holding onto a 
tree to keep from falling over backward.

• 

• 

Snow is a tad chilly, yet very eff ective, because 
it melts and conforms to your personal shape, 
allowing for a good cleaning.
Sand works very well, too! While squatting, 
wipe lightly with a handful of dry sand. Th e 
second wipe can be a little harder. Th e sand 
soaks up any moisture, sticks to other rem-
nants, and is then easily brushed off with a 
fi nal handful of sand. Th is method is not as 
uncomfortable as it may sound.

 
 
 
 
